                                                   ARTICLE IN PRESS



                                               Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167
                                                                                                    www.elsevier.com/locate/physa




        Grid reﬁnement in lattice Boltzmann methods based on
                       volumetric formulation
H. Chena,, O. Filippovaa, J. Hocha, K. Molvigb, R. Shocka, C. Teixeirac, R. Zhanga
                              a
                               Exa Corporation, 3 Burlington Woods Drive, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
                                   b
                                    MIT, NW16-243, 167 Albany St., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
                  c
                   Information Systems Laboratories, Inc., 8130 Boone Boulevard Suite 500, Vienna, VA 22182, USA
                                                    Available online 7 October 2005



Abstract

  We describe a general algorithmic concept for grid reﬁnement in the lattice Boltzmann method. Unlike most of the
previously known approaches, the present one is based on volumetric formulation so that conservation laws are exactly
guaranteed.
r 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Lattice Boltzmann methods; Grid reﬁnement; Conservation laws; Numerical accuracy




1. Introduction

   Whereas the original lattice Boltzmann (LB) method [1–5] is inherently connected with using uniform grids,
mesh reﬁnement is necessary for computational hydrodynamics. In order for the lattice kinetic approach to
compete with conventional CFD, both in academic studies and, especially, in practical applications, this
limitation of the original LB algorithm had to be circumvented. A number of grid reﬁnement concepts for LB
schemes have been proposed [6–10].
   In general, there are two different approaches to grid reﬁnement within the LB methods. The ﬁrst one is
based on decoupling of the LB lattice and numerical mesh [6,7]. This necessarily involves interpolation from
the neighboring nodes as an additional algorithmic step. As a result the existing schemes of this kind do not
guarantee exact satisfaction of the conservation laws. Another issue with this method is that on non-uniform
numerical meshes their accuracy is determined by the interpolation accuracy (see Ref. [9]).
   The second approach [8–12] introduces locally embedded grids, namely the grids with the identical structure
whose lattice spacing and time-stepping are reﬁned or coarsened locally in the same manner. In this approach,
it is essential that the grid nodes coincide with the LB lattice nodes. These multiscale LB schemes with a
reﬁnement factor of 2 between each two adjacent regions have been used in the lattice Boltzmann based


  Corresponding author.
   E-mail addresses: hudong@exa.com (H. Chen), olga@exa.com (O. Filippova), hoch@exa.com (J. Hoch), molvig@MIT.EDU
(K. Molvig), rshock@exa.com (R. Shock), cmt@isl-inc.com (C. Teixeira), raoyang@exa.com (R. Zhang).

0378-4371/$ - see front matter r 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.physa.2005.09.036
                                                   ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                           H. Chen et al. / Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167                           159

software PowerFLOW for almost 10 years now. Representative sets of embedded grids used for computation
of complex engineering ﬂows are shown in, cf., Refs. [13–15].
   Multiscale LB schemes with an arbitrary parameter of reﬁnement were proposed in Ref. [10]. Although the
approaches of Refs. [8,9] and [10] use similar spatial and temporal discretization, they differ in the treatment of
particles number density and the interface between grids with different lattice spacings. The algorithm
developed in PowerFLOW is based on a volumetric formulation of the LB equation [9]. In this approach, a
node of the uniform Cartesian 3D numerical mesh is at the center of the cubical mesh cell. Particles of unit
mass are classiﬁed by their type i according to their lattice speeds ~
                                                                     ci that belong to a certain ﬁnite set [1,2]. It is
implied that type i particles are uniformly distributed inside each cell (voxel). At each mesh node, N i is deﬁned
as the number density for the type i particles at the surrounding voxel. An interface between two grids
with different mesh spacings is a layer of overlapping coarse/ﬁne voxels [8]. Below we are focusing on DdQq
models [5]. For these models, the interface has a thickness of one coarse voxel. This algorithm ensures
exact conservation of mass, momentum, and energy (MME) of the particles in the coarse voxels belonging to
the interface.
   The algorithm developed in Ref. [10] deals with the LB equation in its original ﬁnite-difference form. The
spatial distribution of type i particles is assumed to be continuous. The number of type i particles in an
inﬁnitesimal volume dV surrounding a point ~      r at a time instant t is equal to N i ð~r; tÞ dV . The nodes of a
uniform Cartesian numerical mesh are at cell corners. If desired, the spatial distribution N i ð~rÞ can be recovered
through interpolation of N i from the corners. The interfaces are treated as surfaces of the overlapping faces of
two different grids (for one of the grids, these faces must be the boundary faces). There are two different
interfaces: for particle transition coarse-to-ﬁne and ﬁne-to-coarse grids. A volume overlapped by two
grids can be quite large. Rescaling formulas for N i at the interfaces [10] provide smooth (within the order of
accuracy) connection of hydrodynamic quantities obtained on the grids with different lattice spacings
in the low-frequency limit. It is natural for the ﬂuxes of mass and momentum obtained at the interface
of two grids with different mesh spacing to differ slightly (in the measure of the accuracy of the numerical
scheme) from the ﬂuxes obtained in the same region of the interface in a simulation that uses only ﬁne (coarse)
grid. When conventional ﬁnite-difference and ﬁnite-volume methods are used on similar grids, similar
behavior is observed and the difference at the interface ﬁne-to-coarse grid, for instance, can be estimated as
OðDcx =LÞm , where m is the scheme order of accuracy, Dcx is the coarse mesh spacing, L is a local ﬂow
characteristic length.
   The volumetrically formulated LB algorithm presented here is constructed in such a way that in the coarse
voxels of the interface mass, momentum, and energy of the particles are precisely conserved in the transition
from one grid level to another. This conservation is made possible because of the uniform distribution of
particles inside each cell and a special arrangement of the grids. It can be shown that the uniform distribution
in the coarse voxels ensures the ﬁrst order of accuracy of the hydrodynamic solution for the interface
algorithm [9]. Whereas this scheme developed 10 years ago [8] has been successfully applied for many ﬂow
simulations (cf. [13–15]), accuracy improvements are desirable. For example, linear interpolation at the
interface can be incorporated into the original scheme. As shown in Ref. [9], linear interpolation within the
volumetric formulation leads to the second order numerical accuracy, while still preserving the exact
conservation laws.
   This paper is organized as follows. First, the basic version of the grid reﬁnement scheme that was originally
presented in the patent [8] is described. We proceed by outlining our recent improvements to this algorithm
and discussing the accuracy of the resulting scheme and some remaining issues. Finally, numerical examples
are shown in order to demonstrate the effects introduced by the new algorithm.

2. Basic algorithm

  Our starting point is the LB formulation for ﬂuid dynamics [1–5]:
           r þ~
      N i ð~                          r; tÞ þ oðN eq
              ci Dt ; t þ Dt Þ ¼ N i ð~                           r; tÞÞ,
                                                     r; tÞ  N i ð~
                                                  i ð~                                                              (1)
           r; tÞ is the number density of particle species moving with the discrete speed ~
where N i ð~                                                                              ci at the position
~
r and time t. Here, we only focus on describing the volumetric grid reﬁnement scheme and do not touch
                                                 ARTICLE IN PRESS
160                                       H. Chen et al. / Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167

on basic properties of the LB equation that can be found in many sources including the original papers
cited here.
   The basic algorithm of grid reﬁnement can be now speciﬁed as follows.
   Notation definition:

 Indices f and c denote variables from the ﬁne and coarse grids, accordingly.
 Neighboring voxel
  The one that has overlapping face, edge or vertex with the considered voxel. Faces and edges can overlap
  only partially. The following pairs can exist: coarse voxel/coarse voxel; coarse voxel/ﬁne voxel; ﬁne voxel/
  coarse voxel; ﬁne voxel/ﬁne voxel.
 Interface
  A layer of coarse voxels having at least one ﬁne neighboring voxel. Each coarse voxel from this set is
  divided into nD ﬁne voxels where n is a parameter of reﬁnement and D is the dimension of space. Therefore,
  one can speak of a layer of overlapping coarse and ﬁne voxels. See Fig. 1, n ¼ 2; D ¼ 2; D2Q9 lattice.
 Inner ﬁne voxels
  Fine voxels not belonging to the interface.
 First layer voxels
  Fine voxels that belong to the interface and have at least one inner ﬁne neighboring voxel.
 State i
  A collection of type i particles inside of the considered voxel.
 Exploded state
  A post-collision state i from the coarse voxel belonging to the interface. This deﬁnition implies that for the
  corresponding coarse voxel V (typical examples are V 1 ; V 2 ; V 3 or V 4 shown in Fig. 1), the coarse
  neighboring voxel centered at ~  rV þ ~ci Dct does not exist. The state i from the coarse voxel V is distributed
  among the underlying ﬁne voxels in such a way that mass, momentum, and energy of the type i particles are
  precisely conserved.
 Coalesced state
  This deﬁnition is relative to a certain exploded state j from a coarse voxel V belonging to the interface. The
  pre-collision state i from a ﬁne voxel that is a subset of V will be called a coalesced state if ~
                                                                                                   ci ¼ ~
                                                                                                         cj . After n
  advections on the ﬁne grid, the states i from inner ﬁne voxels ﬁll ﬁne voxels of the interface (some of them
  only partially, see V 6 in Fig. 1). After one advection on the coarse grid, these states are gathered in the
  corresponding coarse voxel of the interface. This completes updating of the voxel V.




Fig. 1. An interface of coarse and ﬁne grid at a parameter of reﬁnement 2. Exploded and coalesced states for the particular case of
D2Q9 model.
                                                           ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                                     H. Chen et al. / Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167                           161

  Algorithm description:
  The algorithmic steps at an interface are speciﬁed below.

(1) Explode
    Exploded states in coarse voxels of the interface are distributed among underlying ﬁne voxels as ﬁne states,
    with a conservation of mass, momentum, and energy in the considered coarse voxel. These exploded states
    are removed from the coarse voxels dynamics.
(2) Advect ﬁne
    1 advection of the ﬁne states
(3) Collide ﬁne
    Collision in inner ﬁne voxels
(4) Repeat 2.+3. n  1 times
(5) Advect coarse
    1 advection of the coarse states
(6) Coalesce
    Coalesced states advected to ﬁne voxels of the interface at the steps 2.–4. are collected in the corresponding
    coarse voxel as coarse states and are removed from the ﬁne voxels dynamics.
(7) Collide coarse
    Collision in coarse voxels.
(8) ¼ 1.

3. Extension and analysis

  In the Explode procedure the exploded post-collision states can be distributed among underlying ﬁne voxels
in many ways, the only constraint being the local conservation of mass, momentum and energy. As a
consequence, there is a certain freedom for algorithm optimization. In the original PowerFLOW algorithm,
the states are distributed uniformly, which is simple algorithmically and performs robustly in complex
geometry/physics ﬂow situations. The extensions described in this Section are aimed at improving the accuracy
of this scheme, without sacriﬁcing its beneﬁcial features. It has been previously observed [9] that the accuracy
                                                                                        f
can be improved by using a linear distribution of the exploded post-collision states N_ i from the coarse voxel
centered at ~  rc among the underlying ﬁne voxels whose centers are at ~rf :
         f             c
      N_ ð~
        i  rf ; tÞ ¼ N_ ð~
                         rc ; tÞ þ ð~
                          i         rf  ~      ~i ð~
                                         rc Þ  F   rc ; tÞ.                                                  (2)
  As long as the ﬁne voxels centers are placed symmetrically in respect to the coarse voxel center, the
distribution Eq. (2) satisﬁes precise conservation of MME in the coarse voxels of the interface. Interestingly
enough, the conservation of mass, momentum, and energy of the exploded state can be achieved by using an
arbitrary vector function F~i ð~rc ; tÞ in Eq. (2).
                                                                         f
  Let us now discuss the continuous nature of the N fi and N_ i -distributions. Consider some ﬂow region solved
                               f
on the ﬁne grid. Although N i ð~  rf ; tÞ represents the number density of type i particles uniformly distributed in a
ﬁne voxel with the center at ~   rf , (hence on a ﬁxed grid, it is only deﬁned at voxel centers), one can imagine
ensemble simulations on the set of ﬁne grids shifted by ððDfx  l x ; Dfx  l y ; Dfx  l z Þ; 0ol x o1; 0ol y o1; 0ol z o1Þ
in respect to the existing ﬁne grid. In this way, a continuous spatial function N fi ð~            r; tÞ is obtained, which is
                                                                                                            c
appropriately smooth given the resolution is sufﬁcient. The same applies to the N ci and N_ i -distributions.
                                           c              f
  We now use the smoothness of N_ i ð~       r; tÞ and N_ i ð~
                                                             r; tÞ-functions in order to improve accuracy of the Explode
procedure in the coarse voxels of the interface. From the ﬁrst glance, it would seem natural to set F~i ð~          rc ; tÞ as an
                                                     c
approximation to the physical gradient rN_ i , as, for instance,
                           c                        c
                        N_ i ð~    ea Dca ; tÞ  N_ i ð~
                              rc þ ~                        ea Dca ; tÞ
                                                       rc  ~
      F ia ð~
            rc ; tÞ ¼                                                   .                                                    (3)
                                             2Dca
  (a ¼ x; y; z and Dcx ¼ Dcy ¼ Dcz for DdQq LB models). If the neighboring coarse voxel does not exist, the
                                                                 c
collection of ﬁne voxels covering its image is considered and N_ i ð~
                                                                    rc ; tÞ is computed by an arithmetic average
                                      f
                                    _
of the particle number densities N ð~   rf ; tÞ. i
                                                        ARTICLE IN PRESS
162                                             H. Chen et al. / Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167

   Nevertheless, there is an additional constraint of consistency of the interface updating algorithm with the
steady-state solution procedure. In the framework of the basic algorithm with n times repeated advection in
the ﬁne voxels of the interface, the exploded states i in the ﬁrst layer voxels should reoccur after the jth
advection on the ﬁne grid when 1pjon. Clearly, Eq. (2) with F    ~i from Eq. (3) does not satisfy this condition if
                               c
the spatial distribution of N_ i is not uniform.To make this interface updating algorithm consistent with steady
                                                        c
state solution, the transformed ﬁnite differences of N_ i should be used in the Explode procedure Eq. (2), rather
than the F~i ’s from Eq. (3). First, set
                           rc ; tÞ
           rc ; tÞ ¼ F ia ð~
      Cia ð~                                                                                                                        (4)
                                                                                  rc þ Dcx~
when the a-Cartesian direction is ‘‘parallel’’ to the interface, that is both the ~              rc  Dcx~
                                                                                          ea and ~       ea are the
centers of coarse voxels belonging to the interface; otherwise:
           rc ; tÞ ¼ 0.
      Cia ð~                                                                                                                        (5)
  Second, set
                           ~iÞ
      F      ~i  ~
      ~new ¼ C        ci  C
                  ci ð~
                               .                                                                                                    (6)
        i                2
                       ci
  The states are exploded as
         f               c                           new
      N_ i ð~
            rf ; tÞ ¼ N_ i ð~               rc Þ  F~i ð~
                                       rf  ~
                            rc ; tÞ þ ð~                 rc ; tÞ                                                                    (7)
in all voxels of the interface except the concave corners, where the states are exploded uniformly.
   The next remark concerns the value of the parameter of reﬁnement n. In the above description of the grid
reﬁnement algorithm, n was treated as an arbitrary integer value. Let us now check whether the overall
accuracy of a hydrodynamic solution is conserved under the coalesce procedure on the grids with an arbitrary
reﬁnement factor n. During the coalesce procedure we set the unknown N ci ð~ rc ; tÞ in the coarse interface voxels
                                 f
to the arithmetic average of N  e from the underlying ﬁne voxels (see voxels V 5 ; V 6 in Fig. 1). The particle
                                          i
                        f
number density N   e differs from N f at the same spatial location because the algorithm does not involve
                    i                  i
collisions in the ﬁne voxels of the interface. The states i from the ﬁrst layer voxels are advected to the ﬁne
                                            ci . According to our previous remark on the continuous nature of N fi ,
voxels of the interface in the direction of ~
in the center of the ﬁne voxel ~  rf belonging to the coarse voxel of the interface centered at ~rc , the following
relations hold:
                                                    e f ð~
                                                   qN                               e f ð~
                                                                                 q2 N
      e f ð~                        e f ð~            i rc ; tÞ                       i rc ; tÞ
      N i  r c þ  r
                 ð~ f  ~
                        r c Þ; tÞ ¼ N i  rc ; tÞ þ              ðr f  r c Þ a þ                ðrf  rc Þa ðrf  rc Þb þ    .
                                                     qxa                          2qxa qxb
  Since these ﬁne voxel centers are placed symmetrically around the center of the coarse voxel ~
                                                                                               rc , after
summation in the Coalesce procedure all terms containing ﬁrst and mixed derivatives vanish and
                        f                      f
      N ci ð~         e ð~
            rc ; tÞ ¼ N                   e rc ; tÞOð2 Þ.
                        i rc ; tÞ þ maxa ½N i a ð~

  Here  ¼ Dcx =L, Dcx is a lattice spacing of the coarse grid, L is a characteristic length of the ﬂow at ~
                                                                                                           rc at
instant t (i.e., the minimal distance on which the hydrodynamic quantities are substantially changed) and
 e f a ð~
½N                              e f over the characteristic length along the Cartesian direction a.
         rc ; tÞ is a change of N
   i                              i
  In order to simplify the discussion, only steady-state solutions are considered below. As far as the grid
reﬁnement algorithm implies

      e f ð~
      N            f
                      rc  a  Dct  ~
        i rc Þ ¼ N i ð~              ci Þ;         a ¼ ðn  1Þ=2n,

the following relation holds
                                      f
      e f ð~       f                 rc Þ
                               qN i ð~
      N i rc Þ ¼ N i ð~
                      rc Þ  a            cia  Dct þ maxa ½N fi a Oð2 Þ.                                                         (8)
                                qxa
                                                            ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                                    H. Chen et al. / Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167            163

  Let us now apply the Coalesce procedure, i.e., set

     N ci ð~      e f ð~
           rc Þ ¼ N                e f rc ÞOð2 Þ
                    i rc Þ þ maxa ½N i a ð~


for the case of an arbitrary reﬁnement factor n ¼ Dcx =Dfx ¼ Oð1Þ. Taking the zeroth and the ﬁrst moments of
Eq. (8) and using the macroscopic equations connected to the LB scheme on the ﬁne grid

      X qN f               X 1 q2 N f
               i
                   cia þ                    i
                                                cia cib Dft þ    ¼ 0,
        i
            qxa              i
                                  2 qxa qxb
      X qN f                     X 1 q2 N f
               i
                   cia cig þ                    i
                                                    cia cib cig Dft þ    ¼ 0,
        i
            qxa                   i
                                      2 qxa qxb

we obtain

     rc ¼ rf þ maxa ½N fi a Oð2 Þ,                                                                         (9)


     uc ¼ uf þ maxa ½N fi a Oð2 Þ.                                                                        (10)

  Hence the N eq                                                                      f
                                                                                            rc ÞOð2 Þ.
                i distributions obtained on both grids differ by the quantity maxa ½N i a ð~
  As it is well known, on any single grid LB schemes solve for the Navier–Stokes equation with the second
order accuracy in space, i.e.,
     u ¼ uNS ð1 þ Oð2 ÞÞ;              r ¼ rNS ð1 þ Oð2 ÞÞ.
  When considering ﬂows with ru0:1 (in lattice units), Eqs. (9)–(10) can be rewritten as
     rc ¼ rNS ð1 þ Oð2 ÞÞ;               uc ¼ uNS ð1 þ Oð2 ÞÞ.
  All the moving states in the above formulas are assumed to be the coalesced ones. In fact, at least one of the
moving states in each coarse voxel of the interface has to be a regular coarse state. Note that this does not
distort the solution accuracy at the interface as long as

                      qN fi ð~
                             rc Þ
     N fi ð~
           rc Þ  a               cia Dct ¼ N ci ð~
                                                  rc Þ þ Oð3 Þ.                                            (11)
                       qxa
  The LB equation on the coarse and ﬁne grids reads as
                                      1 qN ci ð~
                                               rc Þ
           rc Þ ¼ N eq;c
     N ci ð~        i ð~ rc Þ                      cia Dct þ    ,                                       (12)
                                      oc qxa

                                       1 qN fi ð~
                                                rc Þ
           rc Þ ¼ N eq;f
     N fi ð~        i     rc Þ 
                         ð~                          cia Dct þ    .                                      (13)
                                      of n qxa
  Here o is a relaxation parameter in the LBGK equation which is different for the ﬁne and coarse grids [10]:
                   2
     of ¼                   ,                                                                               (14)
            1 þ nð2=oc  1Þ
where n is a parameter of reﬁnement.
                                                                           ci Dct =oc we obtain
  Subtracting Eq. (13) from Eq. (12) and shifting the spatial argument by ~
                                       
                                  1   1 qN fi ð~
                                               rc Þ
           rc Þ  N fi ð~
     N ci ð~            rc Þ ¼                     cia Dct þ Oð3 Þ.
                                 nof oc   qxa
                                                         ARTICLE IN PRESS
164                                              H. Chen et al. / Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167

     Since by Eq. (14),
         1   1
              þ a ¼ 0,                                                                                         (15)
        nof oc
     Eq. (11) is correct.
     Let us show now that non-equilibrium parts of N ci ð~
                                                         rc Þ are obtained correctly in the Coalesce procedure.
     It follows from the LBGK equation that
                 Dt cia qN i
        N neq
          i   ¼             þ maxa ½N i a Oð2 Þ.                                                             (16)
                  o qxa
     Replacing coalesced states N c by N    e f yields
                                          i          i

                                  qN fi ð~
                                         rc Þ
        N neq;c
          i      N neq;f
                    i     ¼ a                  cia  Dct þ maxa ½N fi a Oð2 Þ.
                                    qxa
     At the same time, one can obtain from Eq. (16)
                                  
          neq;c    neq;f     1   1 qN fi ð~
                                          rc Þ
        Ni       Ni     ¼                    ca  Dct þ maxa ½N fi a Oð2 Þ
                            nof oc     qxa
or
                   
           1   1
                þ a maxa ½N fi a OðÞ þ maxa ½N fi a Oð2 Þ ¼ 0.
          nof oc
   Eq. (15) shows that N neq;c
                          i    in the coarse voxels of the interface are obtained correctly in the leading order for
an arbitrary value of n. It was also shown above that the overall spatial accuracy of the hydrodynamic solution
on the coarse grid at the interface is not distorted in the steady-state (and low-frequency) limits. Notice that
setting of N ci in the Coalesce procedure to an arithmetic average of N fi ’s rather than of Ne f ’s would invalidate
                                                                                                i
the correctness of non-equilibrium distributions on the coarse grid.
   Nevertheless, we consider n ¼ 2 to be the optimal choice for the following reasons. A set of embedded grids
with the parameter of reﬁnement 2 is a ﬂexible and economical numerical mesh which enables us to maintain
the desirable value of 0:1 in the entire computational domain. Also, the aforementioned reoccurrence of the
exploded N fi ’s from the ﬁrst layer voxels during n advections on the ﬁne grid can in principle decrease the
solution time accuracy when n is large. As a possible further reﬁnement of the present approach, an algorithm
with one advanced time step on the coarse grid could be used in order to overcome this drawback for an
arbitrary value of n. A challenging problem for designing these algorithm improvements is to conserve MME
at the interface.

4. Numerical examples

  To demonstrate the effects of interface updating algorithm, we choose as a benchmark the simulations of
2D ﬂow around circular cylinder in a channel [16].
  The velocity proﬁle at the channel inlet ðx ¼ 0; 0pypHÞ is set as
        ux ð0; y; tÞ ¼ cðtÞ  4umax yðH  yÞ=H 2 ,

        uy ð0; y; tÞ ¼ 0.
     The Reynolds number Re ¼ umean D=n is deﬁned based on umean ¼ 2umax =3.
     There are three different 2D test cases [16]:
     2D1(steady-state):
        Re ¼ 20;      cðtÞ ¼ 1;      umax ¼ 0:3 m=s;
     2D2(unsteady):
        Re ¼ 100;      cðtÞ ¼ 1;       umax ¼ 1:5 m=s;
                                               ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                         H. Chen et al. / Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167                             165

Table 1
(a) 2D1 case, NR ¼ 51, (b) 2D2 case, NR ¼ 101, (c) 2D3 case, NR ¼ 101

(a)
case                       CD                          CL                          Lr ðmÞ            DPðPaÞ

lin                        5.69                        0.0186                      0.0825            0.1197
un                         5.73                        0.0254                      0.0760            0.1210
ref. values                5.57–5.59                   0.010–0.011                 0.0842–0.0852     0.1172–0.1176
(b)
case                       C Dmax                      C Lmax                      DPðPaÞ            Str

lin                        3.22                        1.03                        2.53              0.302
un                         3.2                         0.93                        2.52              0.303
ref. values                3.22–3.24                   0.99–1.01                   2.46–2.50         0.295–0.305
(c)
case                       C Dmax                      C Lmax                      DPðPaÞ

lin                        2.94                        0.526                       0.1117
un                         2.95                        0.457                       0.1104
ref. values                2.93–2.97                   0.47–0.49                   0.1150–0.1050




   2D3(unsteady):
       Re ¼ 100;     cðtÞ ¼ sinðpt=8Þ;     0ptp8s;

       umax ¼ 1:5 m=s.
   In our simulations, three rectangular regions for consequently reﬁned grids are placed around the cylinder.
For the 2D1 case, the largest region is removed. For the 2D2 and 2D3 cases, all three regions are used. The
resolution NR is deﬁned as the number of lattice links along the characteristic length D (the cylinder diameter)
on the ﬁnest grid. The global Mach number of M mean ¼ umean =cs is set to 0.06 for all these cases. Since the ﬂow
above and below the cylinder accelerates up to about 2:3umean , the local Mach number M loc ¼ uloc =cs can be as
high as 0.14. We would like to emphasize that the original benchmark simulations were performed using
different incompressible ﬂow solvers. Since here we are using a compressible ﬂow solver at small Mach
numbers, we expect a small deviation (of the order of M 2loc;max ) of our results from the reference values of [16].
   The following quantities are compared with the reference values [16]:
   2D1 case: drag (C D ) and lift (C L ) coefﬁcients; DP, the pressure difference between the front and the end
points of the cylinder; Lr , the recirculation zone length;
   2D2 case: maximal values of drag (C D ) and lift (C L ) coefﬁcients in the periodic regime; Strouhal number
Str ¼ Df =umean , where f is the frequency of separation; pressure difference between the front and end points of
the cylinder DP at a time instant t ¼ t0 þ 1=2f (t0 corresponds to the ﬂow state with C Lmax );
   2D3 case: maximal values of drag (C D ) and lift (C L ) coefﬁcients; pressure difference in the front and end
points of the cylinder DP at a time instant t ¼ 8 s.
   The results of computations using the PowerFLOW versions based on the original and new, higher accuracy
grid reﬁnement algorithms described above are presented in Table 1a, b, c. Data labeling in the column case
uses notations un and lin corresponding to the simulations with uniformly (original scheme) and linearly (new
scheme) exploded states at the interface, accordingly.
   In Table 1a, b, c, observe that results obtained with linearly exploded states at the interface are in general
closer to the reference values than those obtained with uniformly exploded states. Typical isolines of pressure
(black lines) and rate-of-strain tensor magnitude (red lines) obtained in the 2D1 case, NR ¼ 50, are presented
in Fig. 2 (uniformly exploded states) and Fig. 3 (linearly exploded states). The distributions in Fig. 3 show
virtually no numerical artifacts around the interfaces (green-colored areas).
                                                ARTICLE IN PRESS
166                                      H. Chen et al. / Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167




         Fig. 2. Isolines of pressure and rate-of-strain tensor magnitude in the outer voxels (uniformly exploded states).




          Fig. 3. Isolines of pressure and rate-of-strain tensor magnitude in the outer voxels (linearly exploded states).



5. Conclusions

   A general concept for grid reﬁnement in the lattice Boltzmann methods is presented. Unlike most of the
previous approaches, the present one is based on a volumetric formulation so that conservation laws at the
interface between the grids of different sizes are exactly guaranteed. These MME conserving interface
treatment schemes have been robust for dealing with highly oscillating distributions. In its basic form, this
algorithm has been successfully used in the lattice Boltzmann based software PowerFLOW for fundamental
ﬂuid dynamics studies as well as for simulating complex engineering ﬂows such as those encountered in
automotive aerodynamics.


Acknowledgements

  Authors are grateful to Ilya Staroselsky and Alex Konstantinov for useful discussions.
                                             ARTICLE IN PRESS
                                       H. Chen et al. / Physica A 362 (2006) 158–167                                  167

References

 [1] S. Chen, H. Chen, D. Martinez, W. Matthaeus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 3776.
 [2] H. Chen, S. Chen, W. Matthaeus, Phys. Rev. A 45 (1992) R5339.
 [3] F. Higuera, S. Succi, R. Benzi, Europhys. Lett. 9 (1989) 345.
 [4] F. Higuera, J. Jimenez, Europhys. Lett. 9 (1989) 663.
 [5] Y.H. Qian, D. d’Humieres, P. Lallemand, Europhys. Lett. 17 (6) (1992) 479.
 [6] F. Nannelli, S. Succi, J. Stat. Phys. 68 (N3/4) (1992) 401.
 [7] X. He, L.-S. Luo, M. Dembo, J. Comput. Phys. 129 (1996) 357.
 [8] Kim Molvig, et al., Particle interaction processing system, Patent 5,377,129, 1994.
 [9] H. Chen, Phys. Rev. E 58 (3) (1998) 3955.
[10] O. Filippova, D. Hänel, J. Comput. Phys. 147 (1998) 219.
[11] M. Rohde, Extending the Lattice-Boltzmann method, Dissertation, TU Delft, 2004.
[12] A. Dupius, B. Chopard, Phys. Rev. E 67 (2003) 066707.
[13] M. Pervaiz, C.M. Teixeira, Proceedings of ASME PVP Division Conference: Second International Symposium on Computation
     Technology for Fluid/Thermal/Chemical Systems with Industrial Applications, August 1–5, 1999, Boston, MA, USA.
[14] K. Uchida, K. Okumura, SAE Technical Paper Series 1999-01-1127.
[15] R.A. Shock, S. Mallick, H. Chen, V. Yakhot, R. Zhang, J. Aircraft 39 (3) (2002).
[16] M. Schaefer, S. Turek, Notes in Numerical Fluid Mechanics, Vieweg Verlag, Braunschweig 52 (1996) 547.
