                                                     Fokker-Planck Model Based Central Moment Lattice
                                                    Boltzmann Method for Effective Simulations of Thermal
                                                                     Convective Flows
                                                                          William Schupbach, Kannan Premnath∗
                                                                          Department of Mechanical Engineering
                                                                              University of Colorado Denver
arXiv:2504.09041v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 12 Apr 2025




                                                                                         April 15, 2025


                                                                                            Abstract
                                                         The Fokker-Planck (FP) equation represents the drift and diffusive processes in
                                                     kinetic models. It can also be regarded as a model for the collision integral of the
                                                     Boltzmann-type equation to represent thermo-hydrodynamic processes in fluids. The
                                                     lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) is a drastically simplified discretization of the Boltz-
                                                     mann equation for simulating complex fluid motions and beyond. We construct new
                                                     two FP-based LBMs, one for recovering the Navier-Stokes equations for fluid dynamics
                                                     and the other for simulating the energy equation, where, in each case, the effect of
                                                     collisions is represented as relaxations of different central moments to their respective
                                                     attractors. Such attractors are obtained by matching the changes in various discrete
                                                     central moments due to collision with the continuous central moments prescribed by
                                                     the FP model. As such, the resulting central moment attractors depend on the lower
                                                     order moments and the diffusion tensor parameters, and significantly differ from those
                                                     based on the Maxwell distribution. The diffusion tensor parameters for evolving higher
                                                     moments in simulating fluid motions at relatively low viscosities are chosen based on
                                                     a renormalization principle. Moreover, since the number of collision invariants of the
                                                     FP-based LBMs for fluid motions and energy transport are different, the forms of the
                                                     respective attractors are quite distinct. The use of such central moment formulations
                                                     in modeling the collision step offers significant improvements in numerical stability, es-
                                                     pecially for simulations of thermal convective flows under a wide range of variations in
                                                     the transport coefficients of the fluid. We develop new FP central moment LBMs for
                                                     thermo-hydrodynamics in both two- and three-dimensions and demonstrate the ability
                                                     of our approach to simulate various cases involving thermal convective buoyancy-driven
                                                     flows especially at high Rayleigh numbers with good quantitative accuracy. Moreover,
                                                     we show significant improvements in numerical stability of our FP central moment LBMs
                                                     when compared to other existing central moment LBMs using the Maxwell distribution
                                                     in achieving high Peclet numbers for mixed convection flows involving shear effects.




                                                   *Corresponding author (Email: Kannan.Premnath@ucdenver.edu)


                                                                                                 1
1    Introduction
Fluid motions coupled with thermal energy transport arise in a wide range of situations
and scales, from atmospheric convection and heat transfer in process equipment and power
generation devices to bioengineering systems and microfluidic applications. Macroscopi-
cally, the dynamics of fluids is represented by the Navier-Stokes equations (NSE) while the
thermal transport is generally modeled using a convective-diffusion equation (CDE) for the
temperature field, sometimes classified as having a combination of hyperbolic and parabolic
behavior [1]. As such, the solution of the CDEs is needed not only in understanding or
making predictions in heat transfer applications but also in the transport of passive scalar
fields involving chemical species, in the interface capturing in multiphase flows using phase
field models, and in modeling of surfactants (for recent examples, see [2–5] that involve a
combination of such cases and other related applications [6, 7]). Of specific interest to this
work is the computation of buoyancy-driven thermal convective flows [8], which involve a
two-way coupling between the solution of NSE and CDE for the temperature field.
    Obtaining solutions to such a set of coupled partial differential equations for realistic
situations using analytical methods is infeasible. For that reason, the development and
use of numerical techniques plays a fundamental role in simulating and studying the com-
plex behavior of thermal transport phenomena in fluids. Traditionally, methods such as
the finite difference, finite element, and especially finite volume methods (see e.g., [9, 10])
have been employed in discretizing the macroscopic governing equations; they are often
used in conjunction with other techniques such as multigrid methods (see e.g., [11–13])
for convergence acceleration and have been investigated previously in detail and are quite
commonplace. On the other hand, the focus of this paper is on the development of a novel
formulation of lattice Boltzmann (LB) method originating from kinetic theory and in par-
ticular as a dramatic simplification of the continuous Boltzmann equation. Much of the
recent interest in such methods arise from their computational advantages including their
effective implementation on modern parallel computing architectures due the local nature
of the algorithms, ease of implementation of boundary conditions using Cartesian grids, and
their natural ability to use more fundamental mesocopic models based on kinetic theory to
represent complex flow physics [14–16]. Moreover, the LB schemes are flexible in that it
can be combined with concepts used in conventional approaches such as unstructured grids
via finite volume methods to handle flows in complex geometries (see e.g., [17–20]).
    As such, the LB method is an efficient numerical approach for solving the mildly com-
pressible NSE, as well as for convection-diffusion type equations, and many other models
for fluid dynamics with multiphysics effects. The underlying idea in the LB method is
that a simplification of the continuous Boltzmann equation [21] is used to track the den-
sity distribution function of fluid particles, whose motion has been restricted to discrete
velocity directions, called lattice links, as they move around and collide. More specifically,
the collision process is modeled as relaxations of those distribution functions towards their
‘equilibrium’ states, typically represented as a discretized form of the Maxwell distribution,
while accounting for any relevant conservation laws. Following this, the distributions are
then streamed or advected along the discrete lattice links, and the fluid dynamical variables
are then computed via taking the moments of the distribution functions with respect to
the powers of the particle velocity components. The LB methods have been applied to


                                              2
simulate a wide range of problems involving multiphase and multicomponent flows, partic-
ulate suspension flows, thermal flows, turbulence, combustion, magnetohydrodynamics and
aeroacoustics (see e.g., [22–25] for some recent reviews).
    Modeling the collision process in the LB method is a decisive feature used to extend
the physics of flow characteristics in the simulation and, more generally, the numerical sta-
bility; to that end, many collision models have been developed. The first collision model
constructed is known as the single relaxation time model (SRT) [26], setting the stage for
modeling collision as a relaxation process using a single characteristic time scale despite the
fact the underlying kinetic phenomena can be multiscale in nature; however, it was found to
have serious limitations in terms of numerical stability. To alleviate this issue, the multiple
relaxation time (MRT) collision model was developed which relaxes different bare (or raw)
moments of the distribution functions at different rates [27, 28], which was found to have
significant improvements in numerical stability compared to the SRT model. Moreover, as
a further improvement, the central moment collision model, which is also referred to as the
cascaded collision model, was then constructed [29], which involves performing collisions
using central moments. Here, the central moments are formed by taking moments of the
distribution functions with respect to the powers of the components of the particle velocity
being shifted by the bulk fluid velocity. Such an approach entails the use of additional
transformations between raw moments and central moments when performing the collision
step; as such, the latter involves the relaxations of central moments to the equilibria de-
fined by the central moments of the Maxwell distribution and this approach resulted in
significantly enhancing the numerical stability when compared with the MRT model while
naturally maintaining Galilean invariance (see Ref. [30] for a comparative numerical study
of these collision models). However, it was found to have numerical hyperviscosity artifacts
when such relaxations are done at different rates for different central moments in simulating
high Reynolds number flows. In order to address this issue, a factorized central moment
collision model was introduced [31], which exploits the factorization property of the Maxwell
distribution to construct the attractors in an ad hoc manner. Another solution to this issue
was provided by developing a collision model that relaxes the cumulants of the distribu-
tion function toward their attractors [32], which involves an additional transformations for
mappings between central moments to cumulants resulting in added complexity.
    More recently, we proposed a new approach to the collision modeling in LB methods that
involves using the central moments of the Fokker-Planck (FP) equation to simulate fluid
dynamics at high Reynolds numbers, which was shown to naturally resolve the numerical
hyperviscosity issues while also showing superior numerical stability properties resembling
those observed in the cumulant collision model, but using fewer transformations and sim-
pler formulations [33]. As such, the FP equation is an important formulation in statistical
mechanics for evolving the density distribution function of particles under drift-diffusive pro-
cesses in a variety of applications (see e.g., [34–37]); it is equivalent to Langevin equation, a
stochastic differential equation originally derived to model Brownian dynamics (see e.g., [38]
for a pedagogical discussion on these topics) and is sometimes also referred to as the Kol-
mogorov forward equation or as the Smoluchowski equation. It has been used to model the
collision term of the Boltzmann equation by Lebowitz et al [39] to represent fluid dynamics
and it has been shown to be a rigorous approximation to the Boltzmann’s collision integral
under grazing collisions and a diffusion limit [40]. As shown in our recent work, a central


                                               3
moment formulation of the FP collision model results in a local and algebraic operator that
is naturally suitable for algorithmic implementation in LB methods for effective simulations
of fluid dynamics [33]. One key feature of this FP-based central moment LBM is that the
resulting attractors contain products of lower order central moments and a diffusion ten-
sor parameter and latter is specified as fixed points of the renormalization group equation
representing the variations of the second order moments under collision when there is scale
separation in the relaxation rates of kinetic processes. These considerations were shown to
be naturally circumventing the hyperviscosity artifacts while also improving the numerical
stability significantly when simulating flows at relatively very low physical viscosities or
high Reynolds numbers [33] unlike the Maxwellian based central moment LB formulations
which are susceptible to numerical issues. One of the major objectives of this paper is to
extend such FP-based central moment LB schemes to simulate thermo-hydrodynamics, i.e.,
specifically to simulate the energy transport equation in addition to the NSE as done in
the previous work. Based on the above discussion, the various key features and numeri-
cal attributes associated with different collision models in the LBM are summarized and
presented in Table 1.

 Collision model       Feature                               Stability           Hyperviscosity
 in LBM                                                      characteristics     effects
 SRT-LBM               Relaxes distribution functions        Low                 No
                       to their equilibria at same rate
 MRT-LBM               Relaxes raw moments to their          Moderate            Yes
                       equilibria at different rates
 MCM-LBM               Relaxes central moments to            High                Yes
                       Maxwellian equilibria
                       at different rates
 FPC-LBM               Relaxes central moments to            Very high           No
                       FP-based Markovian attractors
                       at different rates and using
                       a renormalization principle
 Cumulant LBM          Relaxes cumulants to their            Very high           No
                       equilibria at different rates

Table 1: Comparative summary of the features, numerical stability characteristics for sim-
ulations of flows at high Reynolds numbers, and the emergence of numerical hyperviscosity
effects for flows at very low physical viscosities with different collision models in LBM: sin-
gle relaxation time (SRT)-LBM, multiple relaxation times (MRT)-LBM, Maxwellian-central
moments (MCM)-LBM, Fokker-Planck central moment (FPC)-LBM, and cumulant LBM.

   Before discussing it in more detail, let us briefly review the prior work on developing LB
schemes for flows with heat transfer. As such, they can be classified into the following three
major types – 1) multispeed LB schemes using a single distribution function to compute
both the hydrodynamic and temperature fields, 2) the hybrid approaches using a LB scheme

                                               4
for fluid motions and a finite difference method the energy transport, and 3) the double
distribution functions (DDF)-based formulations that use one LB scheme for the NSE and
another one for the energy equation (see e.g., [25, 41] for further details). Out of these, the
DDF approach has become the most popular due to stability and efficiency considerations.
Earlier investigations adopted the SRT collision model in the DDF-LB schemes (see [42,43]),
which was followed by the use of MRT models to simulate thermal convective flows in
this framework [44, 45]. More recently, the central moments-based collision models were
utilized to construct DDF-LB schemes in two-dimensions (2D) [46–48], in three-dimensions
(3D) [49], and in axisymmetric geometries [50] with improved stability characteristics when
compared to the methods based on SRT and MRT collision models. It should be noted that
all such central moments-based formulations used the Maxwell distribution function, which
depend only on the conserved hydrodynamic fields, in constructing the collision step.
     As further improvements over these developments, in this paper, we will develop new
DDF-based LB schemes using the FP central moment (FPC) collision operators in both 2D
and 3D. In 2D, we will use the two-dimensional, nine velocity (D2Q9) lattice to construct
the FPC-LBMs for both fluid motions and energy transport, and in 3D we will consider the
three-dimensional, twenty-seven velocity (D3Q27) lattice for FPC-LBM for hydrodynamics
and three-dimensional, fifteen velocity (D3Q15) lattice for FPC-LBM for temperature field.
In each case, by matching the variations in the discrete central moments under collision
to the corresponding continuous central moments of the FP collision operator, we will
construct the equivalent central moment attractors. Since the number of collision invariants
of the collision operators for fluid motions and energy transport in the DDF framework are
different, it will be shown that the resulting attractors will be quite distinct. We will
then validate these new LB schemes for buoyancy-driven thermal convective flows in square
and cubic cavities over a wide range of Rayleigh numbers by comparing them against the
respective benchmark numerical solutions. Finally, we will then demonstrate the advantages
of using these FPC-LBMs for simulating mixed thermal convection at higher Peclet numbers
than what can be achieved using the standard central moment LBMs using attractors based
on the Maxwell distribution.
     This paper is organized as follows. In the next section (Sec. 2), we will summarize
the target macroscopic governing equations for thermal convective flows, which is followed
by a highlight of the two continuous Boltzmann-type kinetic equations for representing
hydrodynamics and energy transport in Sec. 3. Then, Sec. 4 discusses the 2D continuous
formulations and the discrete LB schemes based on the Fokker-Planck central moments-
based collision models, while their extensions to 3D are presented in Sec. 5. Subsequently,
the numerical case studies for the validation of the 2D and 3D FPC-LBMs are elaborated
in Sec. 6. Finally, a comparative study of numerical stability of the FPC-LBMs and the
prior central moment LBMs that use the Maxwell distribution are discussed in Sec. 7; this
is followed by a summary of the new developments and findings resulting from this paper in
Sec. 8. Additional attendant details of this work, including the implementation details of the
FP-LBMs in 2D and 3D as well as the guidance on the selection of the model parameters,
are collected together in various appendices.




                                              5
2    Macroscopic Governing Equations of Thermal Convective
     Flows
In this paper, our main goal is to develop and investigate novel LB schemes based on
Fokker-Planck central moment-based collision modeling for effective simulations of thermal
convective flows; based on stability considerations, the approach will involve the use of
dual distribution functions – one for obtaining the solutions of the hydrodynamic fields and
another for solving the temperature field. In this regard, first, we briefly recall the attendant
macroscopic governing equations. The mass and momentum equations of the fluid motions
read as
                                       ∂ρ
                                          + ∇ · (ρu) = 0,                                     (1)
                                       ∂t
and
                          ∂(ρu)
                                 + ∇ · (ρuu) = −∇P + ∇ · σ ν + F ,                            (2)
                            ∂t
where ρ is the fluid density and u is the bulk fluid velocity. Moreover, P is the fluid pressure,
σ ν is the viscous stress tensor, and F is an external body force (e.g., the buoyancy force).
On the other hand, the temperature field satisfies the following energy transport equation
that formally has the form of a convection-diffusion equation (CDE):

                                ∂T
                                   + ∇ · (uT ) = ∇ · (α∇T ) ,                                (3)
                                ∂t
where T is the local temperature, and α = k/(ρCp ) represents the thermal diffusivity, where
k is the thermal conductivity and Cp is the specific heat at constant pressure. Note that
since any other scalar ϕ (such as the concentration field) also obeys the same CDE as above
for the temperature field, the novel collision models and LB schemes discussed in this work
are directly applicable in such other cases.


3    Double Distribution Functions-Based Continuous Boltzmann-
     type Kinetic Equations using for Thermal Convective Flows
In general, the continuous Boltzmann equation, which evolves a single particle density
distribution function, is a more fundamental representation of the thermo-hydrodynamic
processes at a kinetic level than the macroscopic governing equations given in the previous
section. It can be written as
                                         Boltz  
                         ∂f              δf          δf
                             + ξ · ∇f =           +               ,                     (4)
                         ∂t               δt coll     δt f orcing

where f = f (x, ξ, t) is the density distribution function at time t with the position and the
particle velocity represented by x and ξ, respectively. Here, the left hand side of Eq. (4)
accounts for changes in the distribution function f due to particle advection, sometimes
referred to as streaming. On the other hand, the particles interact through collision that
redistributes their velocities, while conserving the mass, momentum and energy of the



                                               6
                                                 consideration
interacting particle pair, and they are taken into              in the time variation in f
                                                                Boltz
                                                              δf
through the Boltzmann’s binary collision term                 δt coll    given by (see e.g., [51])

                              δf Boltz
                                      Z
                                       = wb(f ′ f1′ − f f1 ) db dε dξi .                             (5)
                              δt coll

Here, the distribution functions of the particle pairs pre- and post-collision are represented
by f ≡ f (x, ξ, t) , f1 ≡ f (x, ξ1 , t), and f ′ ≡ f (x, ξ ′ , t) , f1′ ≡ f (x, ξ1′ , t), respectively,
with w = |ξ − ξ1 | being the relative speed, ε the azimuthal collision angle, and b the
impact parameter. These are accounted for in the first term in the right hand side of
Eq. (4). Moreover, if the fluid is subjected to an external body force F , the resulting
        alters the distribution function f in a manner represented through the second
acceleration
term δfδt        on the right hand side of Eq. (4) given by
           f orcing
                                              
                                          δf                   F
                                                          =−     · ∇ξ f,                             (6)
                                          δt   f orcing
                                                               ρ

where ∇ξ is the gradient in the velocity space. By taking various statistical moments of the
distribution function with respect to the certain monomials of the particle velocity of zeroth,
first and second order, the fluid mass density, momentum and temperature, respectively, can
be recovered. However, on the one hand, the continuous Boltzmann equation is formidable
to use since the particle velocity space is infinite and its collision term is a multidimensional
integral; on the other hand, if the particle velocity space is discretized using a smaller
number of velocities to construct a lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) while using a simpler
tractable model for collision, the resulting computation of mass density, momentum and
temperature altogether using a single distribution function is known to lead to numerical
instabilities. Hence, practical considerations suggest the use of double distribution functions
in LBM, where one of them is used to recover the hydrodynamic fields and the other the
temperature (see Ref. [42]).
     Thus, a modified continuous kinetic equation to compute the hydrodynamic fields, which
recovers Eqs. (1) and (2), is given by
                                                      
                          ∂f                 δf          δf
                              + ξ · ∇f =             +               ,                        (7)
                          ∂t                 δt coll     δt f orcing

where the collision term satisfies the following constraints reflecting the mass and mo-
mentum collision invariants (unlike the Boltzmann’s collision term which also respects an
additional invariant related to energy):
                         Z                   Z  
                             δf                    δf
                                      dξ = 0,              ξdξ = 0.                   (8)
                              δt coll              δt coll

Then, the fluid density ρ and bulk velocity u can be obtained by taking the zeroth and first
moments, respectively, of the distribution function f obtained from solving Eq. (7), which
read as                            Z                 Z
                              ρ = f dξ,        ρu = f ξdξ.                               (9)


                                                          7
The second distribution function g used to recover the energy transport equation (Eq. (3))
can be written as
                                               
                               ∂g               δg
                                  + ξ · ∇g =            ,                             (10)
                               ∂t               δt coll

where the local temperature is obtained by taking the zeroth order moment of g. That is,
                                           Z
                                       T = gdξ.                                    (11)

Its collision term thus satisfies the following separate invariant:
                                       Z  
                                            δg
                                                    dξ = 0.                              (12)
                                            δt coll

4     Fokker-Planck (FP) Central Moments-Based Collision Mod-
      eling: 2D Formulations and LB Schemes
One of our objectives in this manuscript is to construct robust models
                                                                         for the essential
                                                                δf
features of the collision operators in Eqs. (7) and (10), viz., δt      and δg  δt coll based
                                                                   coll
on the Fokker-Planck central moment formulations and subsequently develop effective LB
algorithms for thermal convective flows in a double distribution functions (DDF)-based
framework, which will be discussed in what follows.

4.1   Construction of FP Central Moment Collision Operator: Fluid Mo-
      tions
Since, as mentioned earlier, the collision term of the Boltzmann equation is computationally
intractable, it is generally replaced with simpler models that retain the essential character-
istics of the collision process. Many collision models have been constructed over the years;
one popular model is the Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook (BGK) model [52] given by
                                  BGK
                                  δf
                                          = ωBGK (f M − f ),                              (13)
                                  δt coll

where f M is the Maxwell distribution function written as
                                                          
                           M        ρ            −(ξ − u)2
                          f =            N exp               ,                           (14)
                                 (2πc2s ) 2         2c2s

and ωBGK is the characteristic frequency of collisions. In Eq. (14), which is essentially
the Gaussian or normal distribution, ρ and u are the fluid density and bulk velocity, re-
spectively, and cs is the speed of sound, and N is the number of spatial dimensions. As
such, Eq. (13) models the effect of collisions as a relaxation process toward an equilibrium
state defined in Eq. (14), and is a dramatically simplified approximation for the collision
integral (Eq. (5)). When used in constructing LB methods via suitable discretization in
a DDF-based framework, the BGK model leads to numerical instability issues especially

                                               8
in simulating flows with relatively low viscosities or thermal diffusivities (or, equivalently,
high Reynolds numbers or Peclet numbers). Thus, we look for alternatives that can address
these limitations.
    Another simplified model for the collision term is the Fokker-Planck (FP) model [39].
While the FP equation was originally derived to model the Brownian dynamics involving
drift and diffusion of particles, it is also considered as a model for the Boltzmann’s collision
integral term when the particle pairs undergo grazing collisions with small velocity changes
that commonly occur in scattering processes with inverse power interaction potentials and
associated with large impact parameters (see e.g., Refs. [40,53,54]). The FP collision model
can be represented as [39]
                      F P                                          2
                                                                           
                        δf                 ∂                    ′ ∂ f
                                = ωF P        ((ξi − ui )f ) + Dij           .              (15)
                        δt coll           ∂ξi                      ∂ξi ∂ξj

Here, Dij′ is the diffusion tensor parameter that is a function of second order central mo-
ments or the variance of the distribution function (which will be further elaborated in later
sections), whereas the effective diffusion rate coefficient Dij is dependent on the diffusion
tensor parameter Dij  ′ via the FP relaxation frequency ω                     ′
                                                              F P as Dij = Dij ωF P .  The FP
collision model given in Eq. (15) represents the effect of collisions in terms of drift and
diffusion of the particle distribution in the velocity space. The drift term (or the first term
in the right hand of Eq. (15)) represents a process similar to that of dynamic friction and
brings to light the idea that collisions act to eliminate gradients in the particle velocities
of the fluid; on the other hand, the diffusion term (or the second term in the right hand
of Eq. (15)) models the spread of the distribution function under collision via molecular
chaos [53]. These mesoscopic processes of particle populations as modeled by the FP for-
mulation, under coarse-graining, i.e., at larger length and time scales, correspond to the
fluid dynamics of the bulk continuum as represented by the Navier-Stokes equations which
can be established via the Chapman-Enskog multiscale expansions (see e.g., [33]). Inter-
estingly, the FP collision model (Eq. (15)) maintains the quadratic non-linearity seen in
Boltzmann’s collision integral (Eq. (5)) since ui and Dij′ appearing in Eq. (15) could them-
selves be functions of the distributions, f . We also note here that Eq. (15) is more general
than that of the FP model introduced in [39] since we consider the diffusion parameter Dij′
to be a tensor rather than a scalar D′ .
    As discussed in our recent work [33], using Eq. (15) directly in constructing LB algo-
rithms is cumbersome since it involves evaluating the derivatives of the distribution function
in the velocity space, while they can be effectively and exactly represented by reformulating
in terms of their central moments. To that end, we begin with a formal definition of the
inner product of any two objects a and b as being the product of a and b, integrated over
velocity space in 2D as
                                           Z∞ Z∞
                                ⟨a, b⟩ =           a b dξx dξy .
                                           −∞ −∞


Then, we introduce the central moment weighting factor Wmn of order (m + n) based on the
products of the monomials of the components of the particle velocity shifted by the bulk


                                                   9
fluid velocity ξx − ux and ξy − uy of order m and n, respectively, as

                                  Wmn = (ξx − ux )m (ξy − uy )n .                                 (16)

We can then define the continuous central moment of the distribution function f of order
(m + n) as the inner product of the distribution function f and Wmn as

                                        Πmn = ⟨f, Wmn ⟩ .

Next, for convenience, we rewrite the two terms in the FP collision model given in Eq. (15)
in a shorthand notation as
                           F P            FP1
                                                    δf F P 2
                                                             
                            δf              δf
                                    = ωF P        +            ,                       (17)
                            δt coll         δt       δt

where
 δf F P 1    ∂                    δf F P 2         ∂2f           2
                                                             ′ ∂ f
                                                                             2
                                                                         ′ ∂ f            ∂2f
          =     ((ξi − ui )f ),            = Dij′         = Dxx      + D yy      + 2D ′
                                                                                      xy         . (18)
 δt         ∂ξi                   δt              ∂ξi ∂ξj       ∂ξx2        ∂ξy2         ∂ξx ∂ξy

We can then define the changes of central moments of order (m+n) under collision, as given
by the FP model, by considering the inner product of each term in the right hand side of
Eq. (17) along with the attendant terms in Eq. (18), with the central moment weighting
factors of order (m + n) given in Eq. (16), as in

                   δΠmn F P
                                  F P 1         FP2        
                                     δf                δf
                            = ωF P          , Wmn +         , Wmn .                   (19)
                    δt coll           δt               δt

Then, after integrating them exactly and upon rearrangement, see [33] for details, the
refined central moments-based FP collision operator in 2D reads as
                                  F P
                            δ
                               Πmn       = ωmn [ΠM v
                                                 mn − Πmn ] ,                     (20)
                            δt      coll


where
                  m(m − 1) ′           n(n − 1) ′           2mn ′
        ΠM v
         mn =             Dxx Πm92,n +         Dyy Πm,n92 +      D Πm91,n91 .                     (21)
                   m+n                  m+n                 m + n xy
Some important remarks are in order here. (i) According to Eq. (20), collision relaxes the
central moment of order (m + n) to an attractor ΠM      v
                                                      mn at a rate ωmn . Due to the molecular
chaos and repeated randomness or Markovian nature of the collision process, we refer to ΠMmn
                                                                                            v

                                                                                 Mv
as the Markovian central moment attractor. (ii) Interestingly, Eq. (21) for Πmn is related
to the products of lower central moments of order (m + n − 2) and the diffusion tensor
parameter Dij′ . Since the components of the diffusion tensor parameter Dij′ will be shown in
what follows to be dependent on the variance of the distribution function or the second order
central moments, when evolving higher moments under collision, their attractors themselves
depend nonlinearly on the lower order moments and the second order central moments; by
contrast, if a central moment collision operator based on using the continuous Maxwell
distribution (see Eq. (14)) is constructed, the resulting attractor can be shown to depend at

                                                  10
most only on the zeroth moment (or the density) and the parameter c2s . In other words, the
FP central moments-based collision model utilizing the Markovian attractor can account
for more general and flexible representation of the relaxation process of higher moments
than that based on the Maxwellian. (iii) Moreover, while original formulation of the FP
model given in Eq. (15) is differential in nature, the FP central moment collision operator
presented in Eq. (20) is algebraic and local, which greatly facilitates its practical numerical
implementation within LB framework as shown later. (iv) Finally, the relaxation rate ωmn
for the central moment of order (m + n) is a free parameter and can be, in general, different
for evolving different moments. This is similar to generalizing the BGK model with a single
rate constant [26] towards using multiple relaxation times for evolving different raw moments
by their relaxation to equilibria dependent only on the conserved hydrodynamic fields such
as fluid density and velocity, a strategy adopted in some previous LB approaches [27, 28].
However, our approach uses a different model for collision based on drift-collision processes
formulated in terms of central moments and their relaxation to “equilibria” that depend on
both conserved and non-conserved moments in a recurrent fashion.

4.1.1   Choice of Diffusion Tensor Parameter
An important feature of the Markovian attractor given in Eq. (21) appearing in the collision
operator in Eq. (20) is the diffusion tensor parameter Dij′ whose choice plays a primary role
in its implementation for achieving accurate and effective numerical solutions. First, we
introduce the following convenient notation:
                          ′     ′         ′     ′         ′     ′
                         D20 = Dxx ,     D02 = Dyy ,     D11 = Dxy .                       (22)

Now, if we evaluate Eq. (21) for the second order moments, viz., for (m, n) = (2, 0), (0, 2),
and (1, 1) and use the above notation for the diffusion tensor parameter, it follows that
                           ′                      ′                     ′
                ΠM v
                 20 = Π00 D20 ,        ΠM v
                                        02 = Π00 D02 ,       ΠM v
                                                              11 = Π00 D11 ,

                                ′                 ′                     ′
which can be rewritten as D20       = ΠM v               Mv                    Mv
                                       20 /Π00 , D02 = Π02 /Π00 , and D11 = Π11 /Π00 . As dis-
cussed in our previous work [33], in order to correctly recover the 2D Navier-Stokes equations
(NSE) via a Chapman-Enskog (C-E) analysis, at equilibrium, the diagonal components of
the second order moments should be isotropic and equal to the pressure field P = ρc2s , while
the off-diagonal component should be zero. That is, ΠM      v     Mv      2       Mv
                                                          20 = Π02 = ρcs and Π11 = 0. Since
the zeroth moment is a collision invariant related to the mass density, i.e., Π00 = ρ, then
                                                                            ′
obtain the following expressions for the diffusion tensor parameter: D20      = ΠM  v         2
                                                                                  20 /Π00 = cs ,
  ′                               ′
D02  = ΠM   v          2                 Mv
          02 /Π00 = cs , and D11 = Π11 /Π00 = 0. It should be noted that these parame-
terizations are strictly only needed in relaxing the second order non-conserved moments to
recover the desired hydrodynamics represented by the NSE.
    On the other hand, for the cases involving flow simulations with high Reynolds numbers,
or those with relatively low fluid viscosities that depend on the relaxation frequencies of the
second order moments (see the C-E analysis in [33]), we generally have 1/ωII ≪ 1/ωh . Here,
we consider ωII as the relaxation rate of the second order moments (i.e., (m+n) = 2) that is
related to the fluid viscosity, whereas ωh refers to the relaxation rate associated with higher
order moments (i.e., (m + n) > 2) that controls the non-hydrodynamic kinetic processes. In
more detail, the second order moments undergo relaxations under collision at a much faster

                                               11
rate than the higher order ones when simulating flows at relatively low fluid viscosities (and
we may characterize the former as the fast modes and the latter as the slow modes), and
this temporal separation of the scales of the processes should be respected and leveraged in
a consistent manner so as to avoid numerical artifacts such as the hyperviscosities that have
been observed when the Maxwellian-based central moments are used in LB formulations
(see e.g., [31]). When evolving those higher moments, the faster second order moments Πab
for any a and b satisfying a+b = 2 would have already approached their post-collision states,
and do not change further during the relaxation of higher moments of order (m + n) > 2.
This statement can be written mathematically as
                     F P
               δ
                  Πab       = 0, when Πab = Π̃ab for (a, b) = (2, 0), (0, 2), (1, 1),      (23)
               δt      coll


where Π̃ab is the post-collision central moment, and the above condition, in turn, becomes
                            ′
                       Π00 Dab − Π̃ab = 0        for   (a, b) = (2, 0), (0, 2), (1, 1),       (24)
                                          ′
where the diffusion tensor parameter Dab    is treated as an unknown, and can be solved to
        ′                                                     ′              ′
yield Dab = Π̃ab /Π00 , or, in terms of their components, D20   = Π̃20 /ρ, D02  = Π̃02 /ρ, and
  ′
D11 = Π̃11 /ρ. It turns out that such an approach for model parameterizations in problems
with multiple scales has a rich history in physics and is based on the so-called renormaliza-
tion group (RG) method, which has been utilized to eliminate singular behavior in various
fundamental physics theories and perturbative solutions of differential equations [55,56]. In
fact, Eq. (23) can be interpreted as the RG equation whose fixed points provide a princi-
pled approach in choosing the model parameters. Moreover, the use of variable diffusion
parameters depending on the physical regime has an analogy in the turbulent dispersion
of a single particle based on Taylor’s theory and a particle pair based on the Richardson’s
theory, where the eddy diffusivity is parameterized depending on the time relative to certain
Lagrangian correlation timescale (see e.g., [57])
    In summary, then, the diffusion tensor parameter in the Markovian central moment
attractor in Eq. (21) for evolving moments Πmn of order (m + n) under collision is chosen
according to
                ′                ′                  ′
               D20 = c2s ,      D02 = c2s ,        D11 =0            for      (m + n) ≤ 2,

                ′      Π̃20      ′      Π̃02        ′       Π̃11
               D20 =        ,   D02 =        ,     D11 =             for      (m + n) > 2.    (25)
                        ρ                ρ                   ρ

4.1.2   Selected Continuous Central Moment Markovian Attractors
For developing a 2D discrete numerical implementation as a LBM, which uses the standard
two-dimensional, nine velocity (D2Q9) lattice, based on the above considerations, we need
to evolve the following 9 independent moments under collision: Πmn for (m, n) = (0,0),
(1,0), (0,1), (2,0), (0,2), (1,1), (2,1), (1,2), and (2,2). Of these, the first three are collision
invariants corresponding to mass density and momentum, or Π00 = ρ and Π10 = Π01 = 0,
which implies ΠM   00
                      v
                        = ρ and ΠM   10
                                        v
                                          = ΠM01
                                                 v
                                                   = 0. The rest of the Markovian attractors
corresponding to the non-conserved moments can be evaluated from Eq. (21) via using

                                                       12
Eq. (25). Thus, we can summarize all the 9 Markovian attractors for the central moments
corresponding to the D2Q9 lattice as follows:

                      ΠM v
                       00 = ρ,    ΠM v
                                   10 = 0,       ΠM v
                                                  01 = 0,            ΠM v   2
                                                                      20 = cs ρ, ΠM  v   2
                                                                                   02 = cs ρ,

                                                         1h                     i
                      ΠM v
                       21 = 0,    ΠM v
                                   12 = 0,       ΠM
                                                  22
                                                     v
                                                       =    Π̃20 Π̃ 02 + 2 Π̃ 2
                                                                              11 .              (26)
                                                         ρ
Note that the fourth order central moment attractor is now a nonlinear function of the
post-collision second order central moments.

4.1.3    Central Moment of Boltzmann’s Acceleration Term due to Body Force
         in 2D
When an external body force is present, such as the buoyancy force in the case of natural
       flows, the resulting acceleration causes a change in the distribution function at
convective
a rate δf
        δt      in the continuous Boltzmann equation (Eq. (7)). Taking its inner product
           f orcing
with Wmn , we can represent the corresponding rate of change of central moments as
                                   *                  +
                                       δf
                            Γmn =                  , Wmn ,                                      (27)
                                       δt f orcing

Using Eq. (6) in Eq. (27) we get
                                                                               
                                   Fx       ∂f                  Fy       ∂f
                         Γmn = −                , Wmn       −                , Wmn .            (28)
                                   ρ        ∂ξx                 ρ        ∂ξy

Evaluating this exactly, the rate of change of the central moment of order (m + n) due to
the body force is given by
                                             Fx           Fy
                                 Γmn = m        Πm91,n + n Πm,n91 ,                             (29)
                                             ρ            ρ
which relates it to products of the body force components and lower order central moments
(see [58]). In general, it can be shown that only Γmn for (m+n) ≤ 2 are necessary to recover
the Navier-Stokes equations via a C-E analysis of the 2D central moment-based continuous
Boltzmann kinetic equation (see [33]).

4.2     Formulating LBM using FP Central Moment Collision Operator for
        Hydrodynamics
The continuous Boltzmann equation shown in Eq. (7) will now be discretized first in the
particle velocity space and then in space and time using the D2Q9 lattice, wherein the
FP central moment collision operator given in Eq. (20) with the attendant attractors (see
Eq. (26)) together with the source term due to the body force (see Eq. (29)) will be incor-
porated via suitable transformations. The continuous particle velocity ξ is discretized with




                                                        13
a finite particle velocity set eα for the D2Q9 lattice which arises from a tensor product of
the set {−1, 0, 1} with itself whose Cartesian components are then given by

                                ex = (0, 1, 0, 91, 0, 1, 91, 91, 1)† ,                               (30a)
                                                                             †
                                ey = (0, 0, 1, 0, 91, 1, 1, 91, 91) .                                (30b)

Here, and in the rest of this manuscript, † denotes the transpose operator and we will use the
Dirac’s notation of · and · for denoting the column and row vectors, respectively. Then
the corresponding distribution function along each lattice link direction α can be expressed
as fα (x, t) = f (x, eα , t) and the use of the lattice effectively also discretizes the position
space along the link direction with a grid spacing equal to the particle velocity eα times
the time step δt . When Eq. (7) is rewritten using fα (x, t), it is referred to as the discrete
velocity kinetic equation for hydrodynamics, which is then integrated along the particle
characteristics over a time step δt (see He et al [42, 59]). In effect, this results in the LBM
that can be generically represented as a two-step scheme involving a collision step which is
then followed by a streaming step that advects the post-collision distribution function f˜α in
a lock-step fashion along link direction α:

                       f˜α (x, t) = fα (x, t) + Ωα (x, t),                  α = 0, 1, 2, . . . , q   (31a)
                  fα (x, t + δt ) = f˜α (x − eα δt , t),                                             (31b)

where q = 9. In Eq. (31a), Ωα (x, t) denotes the overall change in the distribution function fα
due to collision and the effect of body force during a time step δt , which needs to reflect the
relaxations under collision using the FP central moments-based model given in Eq. (20) and
Eq. (26) together with the contribution due to the body force according to Eq. (29) through
mappings between the distributions and central moments along with the intermediate raw
moments.
    To construct such a collision step, we first define the discrete central moments and
discrete raw moments of the distribution function fα of order (m + n), its corresponding
Markovian attractor fαM v , and the source term Sα for the body force, respectively, which
read as
                                           
                    κmn                   fα
                                    8
                   Mv            X    Mv 
                   κmn  =             fα  (eαx − ux )m (eαy − uy )n , and              (32a)
                                           
                                   α=0
                    σmn                   Sα
                                                     
                     κ′mn                         fα
                            8
                  M v′   X    Mv  m n
                  κmn  =      fα  eαx eαy .                                                      (32b)
                                  
                    ′      α=0
                   σmn            Sα

Then, the finite sets of independent central moments and raw moments, respectively, for
the D2Q9 lattice can be expressed as

                       mc = (κ00 , κ10 , κ01 , κ20 , κ02 , κ11 , κ21 , κ12 , κ22 )† ,
                        m = (κ′00 , κ′10 , κ′01 , κ′20 , κ′02 , κ′11 , κ′21 , κ′12 , κ′22 )† ,

                                                        14
and similar sets for the attractors and the sources follow. Moreover, the following 9-
dimensional vector f defines all the discrete distribution functions for the D2Q9 lattice:

                                      f = (f0 , f1 , f2 , . . . , f8 )† ,

and analogously one can introduce vectors that collect the components of the discrete at-
tractors fαM v and the sources Sα .
    Based on these notations, we can now express the essential steps to incorporate the
collision model by means of certain pre- and post-collision transformations. That is, to relax
different central moments to their respective attractors together with source term updates,
we first map the discrete distribution functions f to raw moments m and then to central
moments mc ; once the post-collision central moments are calculated, they are transformed
back to raw moments and then to the discrete distribution functions, which completes the
collision step. Here, the mappings between the raw moments and the distribution functions
can be represented as
                               m = Pf ,             f = P91 m,                            (33)
where P is a matrix obtained from grouping all the basis vectors for the independent mo-
ments for the D2Q9 lattice, i.e., using the components of the monomials em    n
                                                                           x ey given by
                                                                                                           †
          P= 1 ,       ex ,    ey ,      e2x ,     e2y ,     ex ey ,        e2x ey ,   ex e2y ,   e2x e2y        .   (34)

Here, |1⟩ is a 9-dimensional unit vector given by 1 = e0x e0y = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)† .
Moreover, we write the transformations between central moments and raw moments as

                                mc = Fm,                          m = F−1 mc ,                                       (35)

where both the frame transformation matrix F and its inverse F91 are lower triangular
matrices that depend on the fluid velocity components u = (ux , uy ) and their elements can
be readily obtained by collecting together the coefficients of the binomial expansions which
relate different central moments to the raw moments (see e.g., [60]). Before writing the
complete implementation details of our 2D FPC-LBM, we will now formally express the
discrete central moments of the Markovian attractor κM     v
                                                         mn and the source term σmn due to
the body force by matching the corresponding continuous versions as given in Eq. (26) and
Eq. (29), respectively. In other words, κM   v     Mv
                                           mn = Πmn and σmn = Γmn . Thus, the discrete
Markovian central moment attractors for the D2Q9 lattice are given by

                                κM v
                                 00 = ρ,            κM v
                                                     10 = 0,            κM v
                                                                         01 = 0,                                     (36)

                              κM v   2
                               20 = cs ρ,          κM
                                                    02
                                                       v
                                                         = c2s ρ,            κM v
                                                                              11 = 0,


                                         κM v
                                          21 = 0,             κM v
                                                               12 = 0,


                                                 1
                                      κM v
                                       22 =        [κ̃20 κ̃02 + 2κ̃11 κ̃11 ] .
                                                 ρ
Notice that the fourth order attractor depends on the sum of the products of the post-
collision states of the second order central moments, i.e., κ̃20 , κ̃02 , and κ̃11 . Moreover, using

                                                        15
Eq. (29), the changes to various central moments due to the source term or the body force
can be written as

                              σ00 = 0,         σ10 = Fx ,    σ01 = Fy ,                   (37)

                    Fx                         Fy                     Fx      Fy
          σ20 = 2      κ10 = 0,      σ02 = 2      κ01 = 0,    σ11 =      κ10 + κ01 = 0,
                    ρ                          ρ                      ρ       ρ

                                  Fx      Fy                Fx      Fy
                       σ21 = 2       κ11 + κ20 ,      σ12 =    κ02 + κ11 ,
                                  ρ        ρ                ρ       ρ
                                                            
                                               Fx       Fy
                                     σ22 = 2      κ12 + κ21 .
                                               ρ         ρ
For convenience, a step-by-step implementation of the 2D FPC-LBM for computing fluid
motions is given in Appendix A.

4.3   Construction of FP Central Moment Collision Operator: Energy
      Transport
Analogous to the treatment of the collision term in the continuous kinetic equation for
hydrodynamics (see Eq. (7)), we represent the corresponding collision term in Eq. (10)) for
the g distribution function for the energy transport using a FP model like in Eq. (15) as
                      F P                                        2
                                                                         
                       δg                ∂                    ′ ∂ g
                               = ωF P       ((ξi − ui )g) + D̂ij           ,           (38)
                       δt coll          ∂ξi                      ∂ξi ∂ξj

where D̂ij′ is the corresponding diffusion tensor parameter. As before, for practical im-
plementation of such a model in the LB framework, we recast it in a central moment
formulation. Thus, defining the central moment of g of order (m + n) as

                                        Λmn = ⟨g, Wmn ⟩ ,

and taking the inner product of Eq. (38) with the weight Wmn and performing the various
manipulations and rearrangements outlined earlier (see also [33]), we finally obtain a FP
central moment collision operator energy transport that reads as
                                   F P
                             δ
                                Λmn       = ωmn [ΛM v
                                                  mn − Λmn ] ,                        (39)
                             δt      coll


where the corresponding Markovian central moment attractor of order (m + n) is given by

                m(m − 1) ′            n(n − 1) ′            2mn ′
        ΛM v
         mn =           D̂xx Λm92,n +         D̂yy Λm,n92 +      D̂ Λm91,n91              (40)
                 m+n                   m+n                  m + n xy
While Eq. (40) looks similar to Eq. (21) on the face of it, the resulting higher moments,
which are generated via the recurrence relations based on lower moments, resulting from the
latter are expected to be different from the former since the number of collision invariants
in these two cases differ (see Eqs. (8) and (12)).

                                                   16
4.3.1   Choice of Diffusion Tensor Parameter
In order to select the diffusion tensor parameter D̂ij′ present in the Markovian attractor
Eq. (40) which is needed in the collision operator in Eq. (39), as before, we first introduce
the following notation
                                  ′      ′            ′      ′        ′      ′
                                D̂20 = D̂xx ,       D̂02 = D̂yy ,   D̂11 = D̂xy .
and evaluate Eq. (40) for the second order moments, viz., for (m, n) = (2, 0), (0, 2), and
                             ′                 ′              ′
(1, 1) to get ΛM   v                Mv             Mv
                20 = Λ00 D̂20 , Λ02 = Λ00 D̂02 , Λ11 = Λ00 D̂11 ; these then provide the following
                                       ′                       ′                 ′
expressions by means of which D̂mn can be specified: D̂20        = ΛM  v               Mv
                                                                     20 /Λ00 , D̂02 = Λ02 /Λ00 , and
  ′
D̂11 = ΛM   v
          11 /Λ00 . Now, to recover the correct diffusive flux of the energy transport equation,
based on a C-E analysis, we require ΛM          v    Mv     2          Mv               2
                                             20 = Λ02 = ĉs T and Λ11 = 0, where ĉs is a fixed
parameter, which is usually equal to 1/3 in lattice units in LB schemes like the c2s used in the
kinetic model for hydrodynamics presented earlier, and the zeroth moment is the collision
invariant and equal to the temperature field: Λ00 = T . Based on these considerations, it then
                 ′       ′               ′                                                 ′
follows that D̂20    = D̂02 = ĉ2s and D̂11 = 0. As such, these parameterizations for D̂mn   based
                         2
on a fixed constant ĉs should suffice in establishing the Markovian attractors for all orders
using Eq. (40); this is because usually in the kinetic equation for energy transport there is
a scale separation between the relaxation parameters for the first order moments (which
controls the thermal diffusivity and follows from a Chapman-Enskog analysis similar to the
one performed in [33]) and all the rest of the higher order ones; by contrast, as discussed
earlier, for the kinetic equation for hydrodynamics there are disparities in the second order
moments (which determines the viscosity) and the higher order moments and consequently
involved using a renormalization approach for setting the diffusion tensor parameters. Thus,
the simplest option, which refer to as the option A, reads as
                  ′                    ′                    ′
                D̂20 = ĉ2s ,        D̂02 = ĉ2s ,        D̂11 =0       for all     (m + n)        (41)
for evolving moment Λmn under collision.
    However, as in the case of simulating hydrodynamics, if we also choose the relaxation
parameters for second order moments of the kinetic equation for energy transport to be
much smaller than those for the higher order moments, then for evolving the latter under
                                                            ′
collision, we can invoke renormalization in selecting D̂ab     for a and b satisfying a + b = 2:
  ′                ′                    ′
D̂20 = Λ̃20 /T , D̂02 = Λ̃20 /T , and D̂11 = Λ̃11 /T . We refer to this alternative as option B,
which can be summarized as follows:
                 ′                    ′                    ′
               D̂20 = ĉ2s ,        D̂02 = ĉ2s ,        D̂11 =0         for        (m + n) ≤ 2,

                 ′       Λ̃20         ′      Λ̃02         ′      Λ̃11
               D̂20 =         ,     D̂02 =        ,     D̂11 =           for        (m + n) > 2,   (42)
                          T                   T                   T
for evolving moment Λmn . In the above, we emphasize that Λ̃mn refers to the post-collision
state of Λmn .

4.3.2   Selected Continuous Central Moment Markovian Attractors
Based on the above considerations, we can now derive all the 9 countable Markovian central
moments attractors necessary for constructing a LBM using the D2Q9 lattice in the next

                                                           17
section. Since the zeroth moment is invariant under collision, we have Λ00 = ΛM       00
                                                                                         v
                                                                                           = T.
             Mv
The rest of Λmn for (m, n) = (1,0), (0,1), (2,0), (0,2), (1,1), (2,1), (1,2), and (2,2) can be
obtained from using either the option A given in Eq. (41) or the option B presented in
Eq. (42) in Eq. (40). Then, the complete set of central moment attractors for solving the
energy transport equation using the D2Q9 lattice based on the option A can be written as
follows:

                  ΛM v
                   00 = T,       ΛM v
                                  10 = 0,      ΛM v
                                                01 = 0,       ΛM v     2
                                                               20 = ĉs T,   ΛM   v      2
                                                                                02 = ĉs T,


                         2 2                   2 2                    1 2               
                   ΛM v
                    21 =  ĉ Λ̃01 ,      ΛM v
                                          12 =  ĉ Λ̃10 ,     ΛM  v
                                                                    =   ĉ Λ̃ 20 +  Λ̃ 02 .               (43)
                         3 s                   3 s             22
                                                                      2 s
By contrast, if the option B is used, the higher order attractors ΛM                         v      Mv    Mv
                                                                                          21 , Λ12 , and Λ22  in
Eq. (43) should be replaced with the following:
                      2                                              2                             
            ΛM21
                 v
                   =      Λ̃ 20 Λ̃ 01 + 2 Λ̃ 11 Λ̃ 10   ,    Λ Mv
                                                               12 =         Λ̃02 Λ̃ 10 + 2 Λ̃ 11 Λ̃01   ,
                     3T                                              3T
                                                 1                      
                                      ΛM v
                                       22 =            Λ̃20 Λ̃02 + 2Λ̃211 .                                 (44)
                                                 T
Interestingly, since the kinetic equation for the energy transport equation has only a single
collision invariant (i.e., the temperature field – see Eq. (12)), unlike that for the hydrody-
namics which has three (i.e., the mass density, and momentum components – see Eq. (8)),
the Markovian central moment attractors given in Eq. (43) (or Eq. (44)) differ from those in
Eq. (26); in particular, notice that the former involves non-zero contributions for the third
moments ΛM     v       Mv
             21 and Λ12 .
    Now, an important note on the choice between the option A and option B is in order.
In general, for recovering the energy equation, only the relaxation parameters for the first
order moments (related to the thermal diffusivity) are physically relevant and all the rest
of the higher order ones can be chosen freely. In practice, it would be sufficient to set the
relaxation parameters for all such higher moments, including the second order moments to
have the same values, and hence the separation of time scales for relaxations under collision
as considered for option B is not necessary in solving the energy equation (unlike that
for solving the NSE); moreover, the option A is simpler and in numerical experiments it
was found have very similar numerical stability characteristics as the option B. For these
reasons, in this work, we adopt the option A and the resulting attractors given in Eq. (43)
in constructing the LBM discussed next.

4.4    Formulating LBM using FP Central Moment Collision Operator for
       Energy Transport
Discretizing the kinetic equation for the energy transport given in Eq. (10) on the D2Q9
lattice following the approach outlined earlier, we get a LB equation for the discrete dis-
tribution gα , which can be written in terms of the following collision and streaming steps:


                           g̃α (x, t) = gα (x, t) + Ω̂α (x, t),       α = 0, 1, 2, . . . , q             (45a)
                     gα (x, t + δt ) = g̃α (x − eα δt , t),                                              (45b)

                                                      18
where q = 9. Then, in order to express the effect of collisions Ω̂α in terms of relaxation of
different central moments to their Markovian attractors, we first define the following central
moments and raw moments, respectively:
                        !                   !
                    ηmn          X 8    gα
                             =                (eαx − ux )m (eαy − uy )n , and            (46a)
                     Mv                  Mv
                    ηmn          α=0   gα



                     ′
                                !                           !
                    ηmn                    8
                                           X         gα
                                     =                          em   n
                                                                 αx eαy .                              (46b)
                        M v′                          Mv
                    η   mn                 α=0      g α

                                                           ′
Then, the 9 countable central moments ηmn and raw moments ηmn for the D2Q9 lattice can
                               c
be listed together in vectors n and n, respectively, as

                           nc = (η00 , η10 , η01 , η20 , η02 , η11 , η21 , η12 , η22 )† ,
                                     ′
                               n = (η00    ′
                                        , η10    ′
                                              , η01    ′
                                                    , η20    ′
                                                          , η02    ′
                                                                , η11    ′
                                                                      , η21    ′
                                                                            , η12    ′
                                                                                  , η22 )† ,

while the 9 discrete distribution functions in the vector g as

                                          g = (g0 , g1 , g2 , . . . , g8 )† .

Next, to accomplish the relaxations of different central moments to their attractors at their
own rates under collision, we first need to transform the discrete distribution functions to
raw moments and then to central moments, which can be written as

                                         n = Pg,                       nc = Fn.                         (47)

where P and F correspond to the respective transformation matrices (see the discussion on
the formulation of the 2D FPC-LBM for fluid motions). Then, following the relaxations
under collision,
                                                Mv
                            η̃mn = ηmn + ωmn (ηmn  − ηmn ),                          (48)
for (m, n) = (0,0), (1,0), (0,1), (2,0), (0,2), (1,1), (2,1), (1,2), and (2,2), with ωmn repre-
senting the relaxation rate of ηmn , the post-collision central moments are first mapped to
the respective raw moments and then the distribution functions, which can be expressed as
follows:
                              ñ = F−1 n˜c ,            g̃ = P−1 ñ,                       (49)
where tilde over the symbols represent the post-collision states, and F−1 and P−1 refer to
inverse transformations. Here, the discrete Markovian central moment attractor ηmn   M v used
                                                                         M v
in the collision step is based on the respective continuous counterpart Λmn via the matching
            M v = ΛM v , from which we have
principle ηmn       mn
                                      Mv                 Mv                  Mv
                                     η00 = T,           η10 = 0,            η01 = 0,                    (50)
                                   Mv
                                  η20 = ĉ2s T,          Mv
                                                        η02 = ĉ2s T,            Mv
                                                                                η11 = 0,

                  Mv  2                           2                           1
                 η21 = ĉ2s η̃01 ,            Mv
                                             η12 = ĉ2s η̃10 ,            Mv
                                                                         η22 = ĉ2s (η̃20 + η̃02 ) .
                      3                           3                           2

                                                            19
Once the post-collision distribution functions are obtained, they are then streamed along
the lattice links to the neighboring nodes according to Eq. (45b). Then, the temperature
                                                                                  P8     is
calculated from the updated distribution functions via their zeroth moment, or T = α=0 gα .
Complete implementation details of the 2D FPC-LBM for solving the energy transport
equation is presented in Appendix B.


5     Fokker-Planck (FP) Central Moments-Based Collision Mod-
      eling: 3D Formulations and LB Schemes
In this section, we will extend the previous developments to three-dimensions (3D) suitable
for simulating thermal convective flows. In particular, we will develop FP central moment
collision operators and the LB schemes using the D3Q27 lattice for the fluid motions and
D3Q15 lattice for energy transport.

5.1    Construction of FP Central Moment Collision Operator: Fluid Mo-
       tions
To begin with, the FP collision model given in Eq. (15) can be conveniently rewritten in
3D in a compact notation as
                         F P             FP1
                                                  δf F P 2
                                                           
                           δf              δf
                                   = ωF P       +            ,                      (51)
                           δt coll         δt     δt

where the component-wise contributions of its two separate terms can be expressed as

    δf F P 1     ∂                    ∂                      ∂                    ∂
             =      ((ξx − ui )f ) =     ((ξy − ux )f ) +       ((ξy − uy )f ) +     ((ξz − uz )f ),
    δt          ∂ξi                  ∂ξx                    ∂ξy                  ∂ξz
           δf F P 2         ∂2f        ′ ∂ f
                                            2           2
                                                    ′ ∂ f
                                                                     2
                                                                 ′ ∂ f
                    = Dij′         = Dxx       +  D yy      +  D zz
            δt             ∂ξi ∂ξj       ∂ξx2          ∂ξy2         ∂ξz2
                                          ′    ∂2f           ′   ∂2f          ′  ∂2f
                                     +2Dxy             + 2Dxz            + 2Dyz         ,          (52)
                                              ∂ξx ∂ξy          ∂ξx ∂ξz          ∂ξy ∂ξz

As a first step towards developing a central moment formulation of this model, defining the
inner product over the 3D velocity space of any two objects a and b as
                                          Z∞ Z∞ Z∞
                               ⟨a, b⟩ =              a b dξx dξy dξz                              (53)
                                          −∞ −∞ −∞


and the central moment weighting factor as

                           Wmnp = (ξx − ux )m (ξy − uy )n (ξz − uz )p ,                           (54)

we can then introduce the central moment of the distribution function f of order (m+n+p)
as

                                      Πmnp = ⟨f, Wmnp ⟩ .                                         (55)

                                                     20
As in the 2D formulations before, it is useful to express the diffusion tensor parameter in
Eq. (52) in the following notation in order to clarify its natural relationship with central
moments as defined above:
  ′      ′        ′      ′           ′      ′       ′      ′       ′      ′       ′      ′
 D200 = Dxx ,    D020 = Dyy ,       D002 = Dzz ,   D110 = Dxy ,   D011 = Dyz ,   D101 = Dxz . (56)

Then taking the inner product of Eq. (51) with the weighting factor Wmnp , that is,
  mnp F P                                                       FP1
                                                                  δΠmnp δΠFmnp P2
                     F P 1         FP2                                      
   δΠ                  δf                 δf
             = ωF P          , Wmnp +           , Wmnp    = ωF P       +            . (57)
     δt coll           δt                 δt                        δt       δt

and upon simplification of each term in the right side of this last equation and further
rearrangement as detailed in our recent work [33], we can finally express the 3D FP central
moment collision model’s rate equation in terms of prescribing the relaxation of the central
moment Πmnp towards its Markovian attractor ΠM     v
                                                 mnp at a rate ωmnp as

                                          F P
                                   δ                    v         
                                      Πmnp       = ωmnp ΠM
                                                         mnp − Πmnp ,                           (58)
                                   δt       coll


where ΠM v
       mnp is given by the following recurrence equation:


                    ′           m(m 9 1)               ′    n(n − 1)
            ΠM v
             mnp = D200                    Πm92,n,p + D020             Πm,n92,p +               (59)
                               (m + n + p)                 (m + n + p)

                         ′       p(p 9 1)               ′      mn
                        D002               Πm,n,p92 + 2D110             Πm91,n91,p +
                               (m + n + p)                  (m + n + p)
                          ′         np                     ′       mp
                        2D011               Πm,n91,p91 + 2D101             Πm91,n,p91 .
                                (m + n + p)                    (m + n + p)

5.1.1   Choice of Diffusion Tensor Parameter
Then, evaluating Eq. (59) for the second order moments ΠM           v
                                                                  abc with (a + b + c) = 2, i.e.,
for (a, b, c) = (2,0,0), (0,2,0), (0,0,2), (1,1,0), (0,1,1), and (1,0,1), we can relate it to the
diffusion tensor parameter as
                                         ′
                            ΠM v
                             abc = Π000 Dabc        for (a + b + c) = 2.

Since the zeroth moment, which is equal to mass density, is conserved under collision, i.e.,
Π000 = ΠM     v
            000 = ρ, and the recovery of the 3D NSE via C-E analysis [33] requires that the
diagonal components of the second order central moments be isotropic and equal to the
pressure field, i.e., ΠM v    2
                       abc = cs ρ for (a, b, c) = (2,0,0), (0,2,0), and (0,0,2), and the off-diagonal
components be zero, i.e., ΠM     v
                              abc = 0 for (a, b, c) = (1,1,0), (0,1,1), and (1,0,1), it follows that
   ′      2                             ′
Dabc = cs in the former case and Dabc        = 0 in the latter case. However, as argued earlier for
the 2D formulation, when there are large disparities in the relaxation rates of the second
order moments that are related to the physical fluid viscosity and the higher order moments,
with the former being relatively much smaller for high Reynolds number flows, in order to
simulate such cases accurately and without any numerical artifacts such as hyperviscosities,
it is essential to renormalize the diffusion tensor parameter in evolving such higher moments

                                                   21
Πmnp under collision with (m + n + p) > 2. The condition for renormalization is obtained as
                                               δ
                                                     F P
a fixed point of the following equation: δt      Πabc coll = 0 when Πabc = Π̃abc for (a + b + c) = 2
                        ′
or equivalently, Π000 Dabc − Π̃abc = 0 for (a, b, c) = (2,0,0), (0,2,0), (0,0,2), (1,1,0), (0,1,1), and
(1,0,1), where Π̃abc refers to the post-collision state of the second central moments. Simply
put, this condition implies quasi-equilibrium states for the second order moments when
                                                              ′                       ′
evolving higher moments. These then parameterize Dabc            in such cases as Dabc    = Π̃abc /ρ for
any a, b, and c satisfying (a + b + c) = 2. Thus, in summary, we have the following selection
rule for the diffusion tensor parameter for the 3D model for evolving the central moment
Πmnp under collision:
                  ′      ′      ′
                 D200 = D020 = D002 = c2s ,                      for   (m + n + p) ≤ 2,
                  ′      ′      ′
                 D110 = D101 = D011 = 0,

                  ′       Π̃200 ′       Π̃020 ′       Π̃002
                 D200 =        , D020 =      , D002 =       ,   for    (m + n + p) > 2,            (60)
                            ρ             ρ             ρ

                  ′       Π̃110 ′       Π̃101 ′       Π̃011
                 D110 =        , D101 =      , D011 =       .
                            ρ             ρ             ρ
These choices, especially the renormalized parameterization for evolving higher moments,
and the resulting attractors given below were numerically demonstrated to be crucial in
eliminating hyperviscosity artifacts arise when there is a scale separation in the relaxation
rates in simulating high Re flows [33]. However, the underlying physical basis and its
relation to the renormalization group formulation was not explicitly clarified in [33], which
has been done here.

5.1.2    Selected Continuous Central Moment Markovian Attractors
Our next goal is to determine the continuous central moment Markovian attractors that
inform an LB scheme discussed later that uses the D3Q27 lattice, or equivalently, evolves
27 independent moments under collision. Since the zeroth and first central moments are
conserved under collision, it follows that ΠM v              Mv               Mv
                                            000 = Π000 = ρ, Π100 = Π100 = 0, Π010 = Π010 = 0,
and ΠM  v
      001 = Π001 = 0. The rest of 23 central moment attractors follow evaluating Eq. (59)
together with Eq. (60). Then, in summary, we list the complete set of Markovian central
moment attractors as follows:

                             ΠM v
                              000 = ρ,    ΠM v    Mv     Mv
                                           100 = Π010 = Π001 = 0,                                  (61)


                   ΠM v    Mv     Mv
                    110 = Π101 = Π011 = 0,        ΠM v    Mv     Mv     2
                                                   200 = Π020 = Π002 = cs ρ,




                   ΠM v    Mv     Mv     Mv     Mv     Mv     Mv
                    120 = Π102 = Π210 = Π012 = Π201 = Π021 = Π111 = 0.




                      1h                     i               1h                     i
             ΠM v
              220 =     Π̃200 Π̃020 + 2Π̃2110 ,     ΠM v
                                                     202 =     Π̃200 Π̃002 + 2Π̃2101 ,
                      ρ                                      ρ

                                                  22
                       1h                           i                      1h                                 i
                ΠM v
                 022 =     Π̃020 Π̃002 + 2Π̃2011 ,             ΠM   v
                                                                  211  =      Π̃     Π̃
                                                                                 200 011    +  2 Π̃    Π̃
                                                                                                    110 101 ,
                       ρ                                                   ρ
                     1h                                 i                    1h                                   i
             ΠM v
              121  =    Π̃020 Π̃ 101  + 2 Π̃ 110 Π̃ 011   ,       Π  Mv
                                                                     112 =       Π̃ 002 Π̃ 110 +  2 Π̃ 101 Π̃ 011    ,
                     ρ                                                       ρ
                      2 h                                                                                        i
             ΠM
              122
                 v
                   =      Π̃ 020 Π̃ 102 + Π̃ 002 Π̃ 120  +  4 Π̃ 011 Π̃111 +  2( Π̃ 101 Π̃ 021 +  Π̃ 110 Π̃ 012 )   ,
                     5ρ
                          2
              ΠM v
               212 =        [Π̃200 Π̃012 + Π̃002 Π̃210 + 4Π̃101 Π̃111 + 2(Π̃110 Π̃102 + Π̃011 Π̃201 )],
                         5ρ
                          2
              ΠM v
               221 =        [Π̃200 Π̃021 + Π̃020 Π̃201 + 4Π̃110 Π̃111 + 2(Π̃011 Π̃210 + Π̃101 Π̃120 )],
                         5ρ

                                         1
                            ΠM v
                             222 =         [Π̃200 Π̃022 + Π̃020 Π̃202 + Π̃002 Π̃220
                                        3ρ
                                                     +4(Π̃110 Π̃112 + Π̃101 Π̃121 + Π̃011 Π̃211 )].                      (62)

5.1.3        Central Moment of Boltzmann’s Acceleration Term due to Body Force
             in 3D

                                                   F = (Fx , Fy , Fz ), we take the inner
To account for the effect of any external bodyforce
                                                                         δf
product of the Boltzmann’s acceleration term                             δt f orcing (see Eq. (6)) that appears as an
additional source contribution to the continuous kinetic equation for hydrodynamics given
in Eq. (7) with the central moment weighting factor Wmnp , which can be represented as
                                    *                   +
                                        δf
                            Γmnp =                  , Wmnp .                         (63)
                                        δt f orcing

Evaluating this last equation, we get the source contribution to the central moment of order
(m + n + p) as
                                           Fx             Fy           Fz
                            Γmnp = m          Πm91,n,p + n Πm,n91,p + p Πm,n,p91 ,                                       (64)
                                           ρ              ρ            ρ

5.2     Formulating LBM using FP Central Moment Collision Operator for
        Hydrodynamics
For brevity, we will only highlight main ideas behind formulating the FPC-LBM for hy-
drodynamics in 3D using the D3Q27 lattice as a detailed discussion is found in our recent
work [33]. The Cartesian components of the particle velocity of the latter are obtained from
forming the tensor products of the set {−1, 0, 1} with itself in 3D, which are given by
        ex       = (0, 1, 91, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 91, 1, 91, 1, 91, 1, 91, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 91, 1, 91, 1, 91, 1, 91)† ,(65a)

        ey       = (0, 0, 0, 1, 91, 0, 0, 1, 1, 91, 91, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 91, 1, 91, 1, 1, 91, 91, 1, 1, 91, 91)† ,(65b)

        ez       = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 91, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 91, 91, 1, 1, 91, 91, 1, 1, 1, 1, 91, 91, 91, 91)† .(65c)

                                                                  23
The LB scheme using this particle velocity set is based on Eqs. (31a) and (31b) with q = 27.
However, to express the collisions step in terms of relaxation of central moments, we first
define the various central moments as
                                      
                κmnp                 fα
                              26
              Mv           X    Mv 
              κmnp  =           fα  (eαx − ux )m (eαy − uy )n (eαz − uz )p ,        (66)
                                      
                             α=0
                σmnp                 Sα
from which the 27 independent moments for the D3Q27 lattice can be formed which are
given by
           mc = (κ000 , κ100 , κ010 , κ001 , κ110 , κ101 , κ011 , κ200 , κ020 , κ002 , κ120 , κ102 , κ210 , κ012 ,

                    κ201 , κ021 , κ111 , κ220 , κ202 , κ022 , κ211 , κ121 , κ112 , κ122 , κ212 , κ221 , κ222 )† .
The corresponding discrete Markovian central moment attractors κM v
                                                                 mnp are obtained via
matching with their continuous counterparts ΠM v
                                             mnp . Then, we have

                             κM v
                              000 = ρ,         κM v
                                                100 = 0,          κM v
                                                                   010 = 0,          κM v
                                                                                      001 = 0,

       κM v
        110 = 0,         κM v
                          101 = 0,         κM v
                                            011 = 0,          κM v     2
                                                               200 = ρcs ,          κM v     2
                                                                                     020 = ρcs ,         κM v     2
                                                                                                          002 = ρcs ,

   κM v
    120 = 0,      κM  v
                    102 = 0,         κM  v
                                       210 = 0,        κM  v
                                                         012 = 0,       κM   v
                                                                          201 = 0,        κM  v
                                                                                            021 = 0,       κM  v
                                                                                                            111 = 0,
                         1                                               1
               κM  v
                 220 =      (κ̃200 κ̃020 + 2κ̃110 κ̃110 ),      κM  v
                                                                  202 =     (κ̃200 κ̃002 + 2κ̃101 κ̃101 ),
                         ρ                                               ρ
                                                  1
                                        κM  v
                                          022 =     (κ̃020 κ̃002 + 2κ̃011 κ̃011 ),
                                                  ρ
                         1                                               1
               κM  v
                 211 =      (κ̃200 κ̃011 + 2κ̃110 κ̃101 ),      κM  v
                                                                  121 =     (κ̃020 κ̃101 + 2κ̃110 κ̃011 ),
                         ρ                                               ρ
                                                  1
                                        κM  v
                                          112 =     (κ̃002 κ̃110 + 2κ̃011 κ̃101 ),
                                                  ρ
                          2
               κM  v
                122 =        (κ̃020 κ̃102 + κ̃002 κ̃120 + 4κ̃011 κ̃111 + 2(κ̃101 κ̃021 + κ̃011 κ̃012 )),
                         5ρ
                          2
               κM  v
                212 =        (κ̃200 κ̃012 + κ̃002 κ̃210 + 4κ̃101 κ̃111 + 2(κ̃110 κ̃102 + κ̃011 κ̃201 )),
                         5ρ
                          2
               κM  v
                221 =        (κ̃200 κ̃021 + κ̃020 κ̃201 + 4κ̃110 κ̃111 + 2(κ̃011 κ̃210 + κ̃101 κ̃120 )),
                         5ρ
                   1
          κM v
           222 =      (κ̃200 κ̃022 + κ̃020 κ̃202 + κ̃002 κ̃220 + 4(κ̃110 κ̃112 + κ̃101 κ̃121 + κ̃011 κ̃211 )),
                  3ρ
where tilde in these expressions refer to post-collision states of the moments. Similarly,
matching with the changes in continuous central moments due to body forces given in
Eq. (64), the corresponding changes in the discrete central moments σmnp can be expressed
as
                                       Fx                  Fy                 Fz
                        σmnp = m κm91,n,p + n κm,n91,p + p κm,n,p91                                               (67)
                                        ρ                   ρ                  ρ
for all 27 possible combinations of m, n, p. The overall implementation steps are similar to
the 2D FPC-LBM discussed earlier and full details of the algorithm for implementing the
3D FPC-LBM for computing fluid motions using the D3Q27 lattice are presented in [33].

                                                             24
5.3     Construction of FP Central Moment Collision Operator: Energy
        Transport
The FP collision model of the continuous kinetic equation for energy transport (see Eq. (10))
in 3D is obtained by replacing f with g for the distribution function and using D̂ij′ in place
of Dij′ in for the diffusion tensor parameter in Eqs. (51) and (52). Then, upon defining the
central moment of the distribution function g of order (m + n + p) as

                                        Λmnp = ⟨g, Wmnp ⟩ ,                                  (68)

and taking the inner product of the attendant FP collision model as mentioned above and
simplifying and rearranging we get the following collision operator
                                    F P
                             δ                    v          
                                Λmnp       = ωmnp ΛM
                                                   mnp − Λmnp ,                     (69)
                             δt       coll


where ΛM v
       mnp reads as


                     ′            m(m 9 1)                ′    n(n − 1)
            ΛM v
             mnp = D̂200                     Λm92,n,p + D̂020             Λm,n92,p +         (70)
                                 (m + n + p)                  (m + n + p)

                           ′       p(p 9 1)                ′      mn
                         D̂002               Λm,n,p92 + 2D̂110             Λm91,n91,p +
                                 (m + n + p)                   (m + n + p)
                            ′         np                      ′       mp
                         2D̂011               Λm,n91,p91 + 2D̂101             Λm91,n,p91 .
                                  (m + n + p)                     (m + n + p)

5.3.1    Choice of Diffusion Tensor Parameter
Based on an approach similar to the 2D formulation, the selection rule for the diffusion
tensor parameter, based on the option A reads as
                   ′       ′       ′
                 D̂200 = D̂020 = D̂002 = ĉ2s ,
                   ′       ′       ′
                 D̂110 = D̂101 = D̂011 = 0,                        for all   (m + n + p)     (71)

for evolving the central moment Λmnp under collision. Here, ĉ2s is a fixed constant equal
to 1/3. On the other hand, the option B, which assumes a separation of time scales for
relaxations of second order moments with those of the higher order ones leading to a renor-
malization of the diffusion tensor parameter for evolving such higher moments, specifies
                 ′       ′       ′
               D̂200 = D̂020 = D̂002 = ĉ2s ,                     for    (m + n + p) ≤ 2,
                 ′       ′       ′
               D̂110 = D̂101 = D̂011 = 0,

                 ′       Λ̃200 ′        Λ̃020 ′        Λ̃002
               D̂200 =        , D̂020 =      , D̂002 =       ,   for    (m + n + p) > 2,     (72)
                          T              T              T

                 ′       Λ̃110 ′        Λ̃101 ′        Λ̃011
               D̂110 =        , D̂101 =      , D̂011 =       ,
                          T              T              T
where tilde refers to the post-collision state, for evolving the central moment Λmnp .

                                                   25
5.3.2      Selected Continuous Central Moment Markovian Attractors
Next, in anticipation of formulating a LB scheme using the collision operator with the
D3Q15 lattice in the next section, we can obtain the attractors for all the 15 independent
moments as follows: The zeroth moment is a collision invariant, i.e., ΛM   v
                                                                        000 = Λ000 = T , the
first order moment attractors should be related to the temperature fluxes in order to recover
the energy transport equation via a C-E analysis, or equivalently, their central moments
are null, i.e., ΛM v    Mv     Mv
                 100 = Λ010 = Λ001 = 0, and the higher order attractors are determined by
evaluating Eq. (70) together with either Eq. (71) or Eq. (72). With option A (based on
Eq. (71)), the results are summarized as follows:

                                       ΛM v
                                        000 = T,        ΛM v    Mv     Mv
                                                         100 = Λ010 = Λ001 = 0,


                            ΛM v    Mv     Mv
                             110 = Λ101 = Λ011 = 0,              ΛM v    Mv     Mv      2
                                                                  200 = Λ020 = Λ002 = ĉs T,


                     2 2                           2 2                            2 2
              ΛM v
               120 =  ĉ Λ̃100 ,            ΛM v
                                             012 =   ĉs Λ̃010 ,      ΛM   v
                                                                        201 =      ĉ Λ̃001 ,         ΛM v
                                                                                                       111 = 0,
                     3 s                           3                              3 s
                                                      1 2                    
                                             ΛM  v
                                               220 =     ĉ   Λ̃ 200 + Λ̃ 020   .                                           (73)
                                                      2 s
If the option B is utilized (see Eq. (72)), the third and the fourth order attractors in the
last equation should be replaced with
                  2                                                          2                                      
          ΛM v
           120 =         Λ̃ 020 Λ̃ 100 +   2 Λ̃ 110 Λ̃ 010   ,       Λ Mv
                                                                       012 =         Λ̃ 002 Λ̃ 010 +   2 Λ̃ 011 Λ̃ 001   ,
                 3T                                                          3T
             2                                                         2                                                    
    ΛM  v
      201 =      Λ̃ 200 Λ̃ 001 +   2 Λ̃ 101 Λ̃100    ,         Λ Mv
                                                                 111 =       Λ̃ 110 Λ̃ 001 +   Λ̃ 011 Λ̃ 100 +   Λ̃ 101 Λ̃ 010   ,
            3T                                                          3T
                                                       1                        
                                          ΛM   v
                                             220 =          Λ̃200 Λ̃020 + 2Λ̃2110 .
                                                       T
For the same reasons as those discussed as in the 2D case, we will use the option A and
its associated attractors given in Eq. (73) in constructing the LBM on the D3Q15 lattice
discussed next.

5.4      Formulating LBM using FP Central Moment Collision Operator for
         Energy Transport
We will now discuss the formulation of the 3D FPC-LBM for energy transport using the
D3Q15 lattice, which is a subset of the D3Q27 lattice and the Cartesian components of its
particle velocity is given by

                             ex     = (0, 1, −1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 91, 1, 91, 1, 91, 1, 91)† ,                               (74a)

                             ey     = (0, 0, 0, 1, 91, 0, 0, 1, 1, 91, 91, 1, 1, 91, 91)† ,                               (74b)

                             ez     = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 91, 1, 1, 1, 1, 91, 91, 91, 91)† .                               (74c)

Based on this, a LB scheme for the discrete distribution function gα can be expressed in
the form of Eq. (45a) and (45b) with q = 15. Then, to model the collision term Ω̂α as a

                                                               26
relaxation process based on central moments to their Markovian attractors, we introduce
the following discrete central moments and raw moments, respectively:
                                     
                                   gα
                    !        14
              ηmnp          X
                        =        M v  (eαx − ux )m (eαy − uy )n (eαz − uz )p , and (75a)
               Mv
              ηmnp                gα
                            α=0


                                                    
                 ′
                ηmnp                14
                                    X           gα
                ′M v
                          =                           em   n   p
                                                          αx eαy eαz .                                                     (75b)
                ηmnp                           gαM v
                                     α=0


                                                                  ′
The list of 15 independent central moments ηmnp and raw moments ηmnp for the D3Q15
                                         c
lattice are then given in terms vectors n and n, respectively, as

       nc = (η000 , η100 , η010 , η001 , η110 , η101 , η011 , η200 , η020 , η002 , η120 , η012 , η201 , η111 , η220 )† ,

              ′
        n = (η000    ′
                  , η100    ′
                         , η010    ′
                                , η001    ′
                                       , η110    ′
                                              , η101    ′
                                                     , η011    ′
                                                            , η200    ′
                                                                   , η020    ′
                                                                          , η002    ′
                                                                                 , η120    ′
                                                                                        , η012    ′
                                                                                               , η201    ′
                                                                                                      , η111    ′
                                                                                                             , η220 )† ,

whereas the 15 discrete distribution functions as vector g:

                                           g = (g0 , g1 , g2 , . . . , g15 )† .

    Then, to formulate the effect of collisions as a set of relaxations of different central
moments to their attractors at their own rates, the discrete distribution functions are first
mapped to raw moments and then to central moments, as in n = Pg and nc = Fn,
respectively, where the transformation matrix P is obtained from grouping together the 15
basis vectors as

      P = 1 , ex , ey , ez , ex ey , ex ez , ey ez , e2x , e2y , e2z ,
          

                                                                                                                 †
                                               ex e2y ,     ey e2z ,     e2x ez ,     ex ey ez ,      e2x e2y         ,

where 1 is a 15-dimensional unit vector 1 = (1, 1, . . . , 1)† and the frame transformation
matrix F follows from identifying the coefficients involved in the binary transforms relating
the various central moments and raw moments and is thus a function of the fluid velocity
components. While the explicit expressions of these matrices are not shown here for brevity,
they are utilized as part of the implementation details shown in Appendix C. Subsequently,
the relaxations in terms of central moments under collision can be written as
                                                            Mv
                                      η̃mnp = ηmnp + ωmnp (ηmnp − ηmnp )                                                    (76)

for (m, n, p) = (0,0,0), (1,0,0), (0,1,0), (0,0,1), (1,1,0), (1,0,1), (0,1,1), (2,0,0), (0,2,0),
(0,0,2), (1,2,0), (0,1,2), (2,0,1), (1,1,1), and (2,2,0), where ωmnp denotes the relaxation
rate of ηmnp . Here, discrete Markovian central moment attractors ηmnp  M v are obtained from

matching with their continuous counterparts ΛM      v
                                                  mnp and they read as

                              Mv                 Mv                 Mv                 Mv
                             η000 = T,          η100 = 0,          η010 = 0,          η001 = 0,

                                                              27
       Mv           Mv               Mv          Mv
      η110 = 0,    η101 = 0,        η011 = 0,   η200 = ĉ2s T,    Mv
                                                                 η020 = ĉ2s T,    Mv
                                                                                  η002 = ĉ2s T,
               Mv   2                     2                     2
              η120 = ĉ2s η̃100 ,  Mv
                                  η012 = η̃010 ,       Mv
                                                      η201 = ĉ2s η̃001 ,  Mv
                                                                          η111 = 0,
                    3                     3                     3
                                    Mv     1
                                   η220 = ĉ2s (η̃200 + η̃020 ) .                        (77)
                                           2
Then, the post-collision distribution functions needed before performing the streaming step
(see Eq. (45b)) are obtained via the following successive inverse mappings: ñ = F−1 n˜c and
      −1
g̃ = PP  ñ. Finally, the temperature field is updated through the zeroth moment of gα , i.e.,
T = 14 α=0 α
             g . We conclude this section by noting that the algorithmic details of the 3D
FPC-LBM for solving the energy transport equation using the D3Q15 lattice are given in
Appendix C.


6     Results and Discussion
In this study, through simulations of natural convection in a cavity in both two and three
dimensions, we first demonstrate that our Fokker-Planck central moments-based collision
model can be utilized for accurate simulation of thermal convective flows. The physics
of this problem is modulated primarily by the Rayleigh number Ra, which represent the
relative effects of buoyancy forces to the opposing effects of viscous and thermal diffusions,
as well as the Prandtl number Pr, which characterizes the relative strength of viscous to
thermal diffusion. We will compare the numerical results of simulations using our FPC-
LBMs, across a range of Rayleigh numbers at a fixed Pr for air with a variety of references
including both prior numerical solutions [46,61–65] and experimental measurements [66–69].
In two dimensions, we will also perform a grid convergence study in obtaining the Nusselt
numbers in the simulations involving higher Ra. It is well known that above a Rayleigh
number of about Ra = 108 , the flow becomes transitional and turbulent natural convection
characteristics emerge, and the use of adequately refined grids and the sufficient duration
for the collection of statistics are required. While in the 2D case, we will consider Ra as
high as 1010 , since the standard LBM is restricted to uniform grids and due to the limited
availability of computing resources, we will restrict Ra to be up to 108 in 3D; in future
work, we plan to incorporate grid clustering techniques using coordinate transformations to
simulate higher Ra in 3D. In addition, we will perform a comparative numerical stability
study to show the benefits of using the FPC-LBM over the state-of-the-art LBM utilizing the
central moments-based collision models based on the Maxwell distribution, which has been
used in several recent investigations [46–50], for simulations of mixed thermal convection
driven by buoyancy forces and an imposed shear.

6.1   Natural Convection in a Square Cavity
We perform simulations of the canonical natural convection in a square cavity benchmark
problem at various Ra to provide a validation of the Fokker-Planck central moments-based
collision model applied to both the distribution functions solving for fluid flow as well as the
temperature field. Applying and quantitatively studying this collision model to the second
distribution function has not been done before and is a natural extension of our previous


                                                28
FPC-LBM for hydrodynamics [33]. In essence, the 2D FPC-LBM for fluid motions given
Appendix A and another 2D FPC-LBM for energy transport provided in Appendix B. A
schematic diagram of the problem set up in a square cavity of side length Lo is shown in
Fig. 1.




Figure 1: Schematic diagram for the buoyancy-driven thermal convection in a square cavity
with the attendant boundary conditions.

    First, we now briefly mention the boundary conditions utilized for this problem whose
implementation details are given, for example, in Ref. [41]. The no-slip condition is applied
on all four walls for the fluid velocity using the half-way bounce back scheme for the distri-
bution function fα . On the other hand, the upper and lower walls have zero temperature
gradient (adiabatic) which are also specified using a half-way bounce back method for gα ,
while the left wall has a constant and uniform hot temperature, TH , and the right wall
has a constant and uniform cold temperature applied, TC , and they are implemented using
the half-way anti-bounce back approach for the distribution function gα . As is standard in
performing simulations using LB schemes, we will utilize the lattice units in setting up the
parameters of the problem, i.e., unit lattice spacing and time step are used (see Ref. [41]).
Then, the characteristic length or the side of the square cavity Lo determines the number
of grid nodes used and the characteristic velocity is fixed to Uo = 0.01 so that the Mach
number is relatively small and the resulting flow can be regarded as incompressible. Fur-
thermore, the characteristic force per unit mass used to simulate gravity is Fo = Uo2 /Lo = g.
The hot temperature imposed on the left wall is fixed at TH = 2, while the cold temperature
on the right wall is set at TC = 1 in lattice units.
    The FPC-LBM used to solve the temperature field is coupled to that for the hydrody-
namics via an external body force due to buoyancy. Under the usual Boussinesq approx-
imation, we can write the vertical component of the force as Fy = gβ(T − To ), while its
horizontal component as Fx = 0, so that F = (Fx , Fy ) is the force locally impressed on the
fluid. Here, β is the thermal expansion coefficient, T is the local temperature and the mean
temperature defined as To = (TH + TC )/2 represents the characteristic temperature scale.


                                             29
We perform simulations across a range of Rayleigh numbers Ra at a fixed Prandtl number
Pr, which are defined as

                                        gβ(TH − TC )L3o                 ν
                                 Ra =                   ,        Pr =     ,
                                             αν                         α
where ν and α are the kinematic viscosity (which controls the momentum diffusivity) and
thermal diffusivity, respectively, and they are related to the relaxation parameters used in
the collision steps (see the last paragraphs of Appendices A and B for details). Here, unless
otherwise stated, we fix Pr as 0.71 corresponding to that of air.
     The heat transfer rate is determined by the dimensionless Nusselt number, which re-
quires an estimation of the normal temperature gradient on walls. Since we use a half-way
bounce back boundary technique, our true boundary location is half way located between
the first fluid node and that of the ghost node inside the wall. To that end, we utilize a
second order Lagrange interpolating polynomial for unequally spaced data to estimate the
first derivative of the temperature field, which reads as
                       2x − x1 − x2                   2x − x0 − x2                   2x − x0 − x1
f ′ (x) = f (x0 )                        + f (x1 )                      + f (x2 )                      ,
                    (x0 − x1 )(x0 − x2 )           (x1 − x0 )(x1 − x2 )           (x2 − x0 )(x2 − x1 )

where the wall location is at x0 = 0, and the first two fluid nodes are located at x1 = 1/2
and x2 = 3/2, respectively. Subsequently, expressing the function values corresponding to
the temperature on the wall and the temperature at the first two fluid nodes as f (x0 ) = TH ,
f (x1 ) = T1 , and f (x2 ) = T2 , respectively, and then evaluating the derivative at x = x0 = 0,
we get
                                     ∂T       8          1
                                           = − TH + 3T1 − T2 .
                                     ∂x x0    3          3
Then, the local Nusselt number Nu0 at the hot wall, where T = TH , is defined as
                                             
                                        Lo      ∂T
                             Nu0 =
                                     TH − TC ∂x x0

and the average Nusselt number ⟨Nu0 ⟩ at this wall as

                                                       ZLo
                                                  1
                                         ⟨Nu0 ⟩ =            Nu0 dy
                                                  Lo
                                                       y=0


    The simulation results of the dimensionless temperature contours θ = (T −TC )/(TH −TC )
and streamlines for the velocity fields at steady state computed using the 2D FPC-LBMs
using a resolution of 512 × 512 grid nodes for Ra = 103 , 104 , 105 , and 106 are shown in
Figs. 2-5. Clearly, as Ra increases, the temperature boundary layers at the hot and cold
walls becomes thinner with a concomitant increase in the natural convective flows in their
vicinities; moreover, as the relative effects of the buoyancy forces over the counteracting
viscous forces and thermal diffusion increase, the vortical structures, which are formed as a
result of clockwise flow circulation due to thermal exchanges between the side walls, become


                                                       30
increasingly more complex. These observations are found to be qualitatively similar to those
shown in the literature.




Figure 2: Dimensionless temperature contours (left) and streamlines (right) of natural
convection in square cavity computed using the 2D FPC-LBM with Ra = 103 , Pr = 0.71,
and a resolution of 512 × 512 grid nodes.




Figure 3: Dimensionless temperature contours (left) and streamlines (right) of natural
convection in square cavity computed using the 2D FPC-LBM with Ra = 104 , Pr = 0.71,
and a resolution of 512 × 512 grid nodes.




                                            31
Figure 4: Dimensionless temperature contours (left) and streamlines (right) of natural
convection in square cavity computed using the 2D FPC-LBM with Ra = 105 , Pr = 0.71,
and a resolution of 512 × 512 grid nodes.




Figure 5: Dimensionless temperature contours (left) and streamlines (right) of natural
convection in square cavity computed using the 2D FPC-LBM with Ra = 106 , Pr = 0.71,
and a resolution of 512 × 512 grid nodes.

    However, to get a more quantitative comparison, next we look at the temperature profiles
along the horizontal centerlines at y/Lo = 0.5 for the above low to moderate Rayleigh
numbers. Figure 6 shows those profiles computed using the FPC-LBMs overlayed with the
prior reference numerical data of Ref. [63] for Ra = 103 through Ra = 106 . Good agreement
is seen for these cases.




                                            32
Figure 6: Comparison of computed dimensionless temperatures along the horizontal center-
line for natural convection in a square cavity computed using the 2D FPC-LBM (lines) with
the prior numerical results of Dixit and Babu (2006) [63] for Rayleigh numbers Ra = 103 ,
104 , 105 and 106 at a fixed Prandtl number Pr = 0.71 and a resolution of 512 × 512 grid
nodes.

    Moreover, to get further validation quantitatively, some relevant parameters such as the
Nusselt numbers (maximum, minimum and average) along the heated wall and maximum
natural convection velocity components and their locations are computed using the 2D FPC-
LBMs and then compared with reference data available in the literature. The definitions
of those parameters are as follows: umax is the maximum horizontal velocity on the vertical
centerline of the cavity and vmax is the maximum vertical velocity on the horizontal centerline
of the cavity with their locations given as y and x, respectively; ⟨Nu0 ⟩, (Nu0 )max , and
(Nu0 )min are the average Nusselt number, maximum Nusselt number and minimum Nusselt
number, respectively, along the hot wall at x = 0, while the location of the last two quantities
are identified to be at y. Here, the coordinate locations are normalized by the characteristic
length Lo . The results for these parameters at Ra = 103 , 104 , 105 , and 106 are tabulated in
Tables 2-5, where the comparisons are made against the prior numerical solutions reported
in Refs. [46, 61–63]. Evidently, the FPC-LBM results are generally in good quantitative
agreement with the available data in the literature.




                                              33
        Ra    Parameter    FPC-LBM         Ref. 1     Ref. 2      Ref. 3       Ref. 4

       103      umax         3.6418        3.634         −        3.6529      3.64945
                 y           0.8131        0.813         −        0.8125      0.81324
                 vmax        3.6900        3.697         −        3.6820      3.69744
                  x          0.1787        0.179         −        0.1718      0.17832
                ⟨Nu0 ⟩       1.1153        1.105         −        1.1272         −
              (Nu0 )max      1.5089        1.501         −          −            −
                 y           0.0793        0.087         −          −            −
              (Nu0 )min      0.6898        0.694         −          −            −
                 y           0.9990        1.000         −          −            −

Table 2: Comparison of computed Nusselt numbers (maximum, minimum and average)
along the heated wall and maximum natural convection velocity components and their
locations computed using the 2D FPC-LBM with the reference numerical data of Ref. 1
(de Vahl Davis (1983)) [61], Ref. 2 (Hortmann et al. (1990)) [62], Ref. 3 (Dixit and Babu
et al. (2006)) [63], and Ref. 4 (Sharma et al. (2018)) [46] for natural convection in a square
cavity with Ra = 103 , Pr = 0.71, and a resolution of 512 × 512 of grid nodes.



      Ra     Parameter    FPC-LBM         Ref. 1      Ref. 2      Ref. 3       Ref. 4

      104      umax        16.1537       16.182      16.1759      16.163      16.18340
                y          0.8229         0.823      0.82551      0.828        0.82323
               vmax        19.5845       19.509      19.6242      19.569      19.62830
                x          0.1182         0.120      0.12009      0.125        0.11886
               ⟨Nu0 ⟩      2.2431         2.242         −          2.247          −
             (Nu0 )max     3.5343         3.545         −            −            −
                y          0.1360         0.149         −            −            −
             (Nu0 )min     0.5835         0.592         −            −            −
                y          0.9990         1.000         −            −            −

Table 3: Comparison of computed Nusselt numbers (maximum, minimum and average)
along the heated wall and maximum natural convection velocity components and their
locations computed using the 2D FPC-LBM with the reference numerical data of Ref. 1
(de Vahl Davis (1983)) [61], Ref. 2 (Hortmann et al. (1990)) [62], Ref. 3 (Dixit and Babu
et al. (2006)) [63], and Ref. 4 (Sharma et al. (2018)) [46] for natural convection in a square
cavity with Ra = 104 , Pr = 0.71, and a resolution of 512 × 512 of grid nodes.




                                             34
      Ra     Parameter    FPC-LBM         Ref. 1      Ref. 2       Ref. 3       Ref. 4

      105      umax        34.7823         34.18      34.7385      35.521      34.74050
                y          0.8546          0.855      0.85535      0.8554       0.85461
                vmax       68.6323         68.22      68.6359      68.655      68.63500
                 x         0.0654          0.066      0.06602      0.0664       0.06585
               ⟨Nu0 ⟩       4.5188         4.523      4.52188      4.5226         −
             (Nu0 )max      7.7272         7.761      7.7214         −            −
                y           0.0788         0.085        −            −            −
             (Nu0 )min      0.7220         0.736         −           −            −
                y           0.9954         1.000         −           −            −

Table 4: Comparison of computed Nusselt numbers (maximum, minimum and average)
along the heated wall and maximum natural convection velocity components and their
locations computed using the 2D FPC-LBM with the reference numerical data of Ref. 1
(de Vahl Davis (1983)) [61], Ref. 2 (Hortmann et al. (1990)) [62], Ref. 3 (Dixit and Babu
et al. (2006)) [63], and Ref. 4 (Sharma et al. (2018)) [46] for natural convection in a square
cavity with Ra = 105 , Pr = 0.71, and a resolution of 512 × 512 of grid nodes.


     Ra     Parameter    FPC-LBM         Ref. 1      Ref. 2       Ref. 3         Ref. 4

     106      umax        64.8670        65.33       64.8340      64.630       64.83190
               y           0.8506        0.851       0.85036      0.8496       0.84990
              vmax       220.5401        216.75      220.473      219.866      220.56600
               x          0.0381         0.0387      0.03887       0.0371       0.03775
              ⟨Nu0 ⟩       8.8116        8.928          −          8.805           −
            (Nu0 )max     17.5230        18.076         −            −             −
               y           0.0400        0.0456         −            −             −
            (Nu0 )min      0.9755        1.005          −            −             −
               y           0.9990        1.000          −            −             −

Table 5: Comparison of computed Nusselt numbers (maximum, minimum and average)
along the heated wall and maximum natural convection velocity components and their
locations computed using the 2D FPC-LBM with the reference numerical data of Ref. 1
(de Vahl Davis (1983)) [61], Ref. 2 (Hortmann et al. (1990)) [62], Ref. 3 (Dixit and Babu
et al. (2006)) [63], and Ref. 4 (Sharma et al. (2018)) [46] for natural convection in a square
cavity with Ra = 106 , Pr = 0.71, and a resolution of 512 × 512 of grid nodes.

   Moving beyond the moderate Rayleigh numbers, from Ra at 106 to higher values at 107
and 108 , it is expected that to resolve the progressively thinner boundary layers, resolutions
greater than 5122 grid points are necessary to resolve the heat transfer rates adequately

                                              35
across the heated wall. Hence, we performed a systematic grid convergence study in the
prediction of the Nusselt numbers at Ra = 106 , 107 and 108 for a wide range of following
grid resolutions: 5122 , 7682 , 10242 , 12802 , 15362 , 17922 , and 20482 . All the simulations were
run for 20 × 106 time steps. The results are shown in Table 6 for the average, maximum
and minimum Nusselt numbers. Looking at this table, we note that up to Ra = 107 the
parameters listed tend to converge generally to the first or second decimal place as the grid
resolution is increased. For Ra = 107 , a resolution of 15362 seems to provide sufficiently
converged heat transfer rate parameters, while the same grid for Ra = 108 are not sufficient
and higher resolutions are required. Moreover, it should be noted that the latter case is near
the threshold or critical Rayleigh number to transition to turbulent natural convection, as,
for example, Ref. [70] reports the onset to turbulence to be associated with Ra ≈ 1.84 × 108 .
Hence, it is not guaranteed that steady state results exists at such a high Ra.

 Ra      N2       ⟨Nu⟩      ⟨Nu0 ⟩    ⟨Nu1/2 ⟩   (Nu0 )max          y          (Nu0 )min      y
       5122      8.8031     8.8102     8.8222     17.5217         0.0400        0.9742     0.9990
       7682      8.8110     8.8142     8.8236     17.5368         0.0397        0.9731     0.9993
       10242     8.8147     8.8156     8.8243     17.5398         0.0396        0.9714     0.9995
 106   12802     8.8159     8.8153     8.8234     17.5351         0.0395        0.9711     0.9996
       15362     8.8176     8.8122     8.8260     17.5186         0.0394        0.9723     0.9997
       17922     8.8172     8.8212     8.8224     17.5443         0.0394        0.9737     0.9980
       20482     8.7914     8.7960     8.7865     17.4449         0.0374        0.9769     0.9978
       5122     16.4756    16.4907    16.5109     38.9876         0.0186        1.3838     0.9971
       7682     16.4943    16.5022    16.5175     39.2576         0.0176        1.3655     0.9993
       10242    16.5025    16.5076    16.5197     39.3428         0.0181        1.3616     0.9995
 107   12802    16.5071    16.5105    16.5208     39.3771         0.0176        1.3581     0.9996
       15362    16.5099    16.5124    16.5213     39.3928         0.0179        1.3604     0.9997
       17922    16.5115    16.5133    16.5212     39.3935         0.0176        1.3565     0.9997
       20482    16.5121    16.5123    16.5210     39.3919         0.0178        1.3585     0.9993
       5122     30.0925    30.1365    30.1631     90.8228     9.7656 × 1094     1.9434     0.9971
       7682     30.1548    30.1733    30.1999     84.9057     6.5104 × 1094     1.9448     0.9980
       10242    30.1772    30.1872    30.2102     86.0334        0.0083         1.9354     0.9985
 108   12802    30.1851    30.1903    30.2113     86.5318        0.0082         1.9298     0.9988
       15362    30.1833    30.1831    30.2061     86.7108        0.0081         1.9236     0.9990
       17922    30.1876    30.2005    30.2073     86.9228        0.0081         1.9222     0.9997
       20482    29.9287    30.1593    29.8197     86.6836        0.0085         1.9299     0.9998

Table 6: Grid refinement study for simulation of natural convection in a square cavity at
moderate Rayleigh numbers computed using the 2D FPC-LBM with resolutions of 5122 ,
7682 , 10242 , 15362 , 17922 and 20482 grid nodes showing the results of the Nusselt numbers
(maximum, minimum, and average).

    For convenience, we summarize the results for most relevant average Nusselt numbers
at the hot wall computed using the 2D FPC-LBM at Ra = 107 , 108 and 109 and compared
with other numerical studies [46, 63, 70] in Table 7. We used a grid resolution of 20482 ,

                                                 36
which is generally higher than those used in such other investigations. At any rate, our
results are largely consistent with those reported by such earlier studies.

                                                 Ra = 107   Ra = 108   Ra = 109
                      FPC-LBM                    16.5123    30.1593    53.9812
               Sharma et al. (2018) [46]         16.52328   30.2246    54.7531
              Dixit and Babu (2006) [63]         16.7900    30.5060    57.3500
           Le Quéré and Behnia (1998) [70]     16.5230    30.2250       -

Table 7: Comparison of the average Nusselt numbers computed using the 2D FPC-LBM
with a resolution of 2048 × 2048 grid nodes at Ra = 107 , 108 , and 109 against reference
numerical data of Le Quéré and Behnia (1998) [70], Dixit and Babu (2006) [63] and Sharma
et al. (2018) [46].

Pushing the Rayleigh numbers into the transitional and fully turbulent regime, we performed
additional computations at Ra = 109 and 1010 using a grid resolution of 20482 . For these
cases, numerical results were recently reported in Ref. [46], which we used for comparison.
Figure 7a shows the variation of the average Nusselt number along the hot wall from top
to bottom for Ra = 108 , 109 and 1010 computed using the 2D FPC-LBMs and the results
were time averaged over a duration of 90 million time steps. Shown in this figure are the
prior numerical results of Ref. [46] and our results are found to be in good quantitative
agreement with it. Moreover, in Fig. 7b our results at Ra = 109 are also compared with the
available experimental data of Refs. [66] and [67], which show satisfactory agreement given
the measurement uncertainty inherent in the latter. In summary, these results indicate the
FPC-LBM is a viable and accurate approach for thermal convective flows at high Rayleigh
numbers.




                                            37
                     (a)                                          (b)

Figure 7: (a) Variation of the Nusselt number on the hot wall (left) for in the natural
convection in a square cavity at high Rayleigh numbers of Ra = 108 , 109 and 1010 . A
grid resolution of 2048 × 2048 was used and time averaged statistics for the temperature
field computed using the 2D FPC-LBM (lines) were collected from 10 × 106 to 100 × 106
time steps before estimating the Nusselt numbers. Comparison is made with the prior
numerical results of Sharma et al. (2018) [46]. (b) Moreover, the FPC-LBM results for
the case of Ra = 109 is compared with the available experimental data from Mergui et al.
(1993) [67] Tian et al. (2000) [66] in addition to the prior numerical solution of Sharma et
al. (2018) [46].


6.2   Natural Convection in a Cubic Cavity
Next, we discuss the simulation results of the natural convection inside a cubic cavity of
volume L3o using the FPC-LBM on the D3Q27 lattice for hydrodynamics presented in our
recent work [33] and another FPC-LBM on the D3Q15 lattice for the energy equation
discussed in Appendix C. The no-slip boundary condition is applied on the velocity field
on all wall surfaces; moreover, a constant and uniform hot temperature, TH = 2, is applied
on the left side wall and a constant and uniform cold temperature, TC = 1, is applied to
the right wall. All other walls are considered to be insulated and have zero temperature
gradient in the normal direction as indicated in the schematic diagram in Fig. 8. The
Boussinesq approximation is used to apply a buoyancy force F = (Fx , Fy , Fz ) due to local
changes in density that would otherwise occur due to local changes in temperature, resulting
in natural convection; the local components of this body force are Fx = 0, Fy = 0, and
Fz = gβ(T − To ). In this work, we perform 3D simulations of natural convection in a cubic
cavity at moderately high Rayleigh numbers.




                                            38
Figure 8: Schematic diagram for the buoyancy-driven thermal convection in a cubic cavity
with the attendant thermal boundary conditions. No slip velocity conditions are imposed
on all wall surfaces.

    Figure 9 shows the simulations results for Ra = 105 , 106 , 107 , and 108 indicating the
isosurfaces of constant dimensionless temperature profiles between the values of θ = 0 and
θ = 1 in increments of δθ = 0.1, where θ = (T − TC )/(TH − TC ). They indicate that
the formation of progressively thinner boundary layers near the walls with the imposed
temperatures as the Rayleigh number is increased, and due to the presence of buoyancy
forces they result in the vortex generation within the cavity. The natural convective flows
thus formed cause increase in the heat transfer rates as Ra is increased, which will be
measured and evaluated in terms of the Nusselt number in what follows.




                                            39
                 (a) Ra = 105                                (b) Ra = 106




                 (c) Ra = 107                                (d) Ra = 108

Figure 9: Isosurfaces of dimensionless temperatures between hot and cold reference values
in natural convection in a cubic cavity computed using the 3D FPC-LBM for Rayleigh
numbers from Ra = 105 , 106 , 107 , and 108 with Pr = 0.71. All cases used a resolution of
128 × 128 × 128 grid nodes.

    Before discussing further simulation results, we now provide an indication of the com-
putational run times involved. The simulations were performed on the INCLINE parallel
computer cluster hosted at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs (UCCS). As
an example, the turnaround time for performing 5 × 106 time steps of the simulation for
the Ra = 108 case using 1283 grid nodes on 512 cores was about 30.7 hours. Then, to
get a quantitative comparison of the simulation results using the FPC-LBM, we look at
the dimensionless temperature and natural convection velocity profiles along the vertical
and horizontal center-lines in the primary mid-plane, and numerical [64, 65] and experi-
mental [68, 69, 71] data available for the cases of Ra = 105 and Ra = 106 will be utilized
as reference solutions in this regard. While such numerical solutions use the same veloc-
ity and thermal boundary conditions, it should be noted that the experimental data are


                                           40
subject to variations in the boundary conditions as the perfectly insulated condition is not
always completely met; in particular, Krane (1983) [68], Bilski et al. (1986) and Briggs
and Jones (1985) [71] consider thermally conducting top and bottom surfaces of the cavity
in lieu of insulated boundaries. For example, this is illustrated by the experimental set
up shown in Fig. 2 in Briggs and Jones (1985) [71]. Figures 10 and 11 present the results
and comparisons at Ra = 105 and Ra = 106 , respectively. While the FPC-LBM results are
consistent with the experimental data across the domain associated with the constant wall
temperature boundaries, some differences are noticed across the direction associated with
the insulated boundaries, where, as noted above, the experimental set up does not have
perfectly insulated surfaces, but conducting surfaces. Nevertheless, the FPC-LBM results
are in very good agreement with the available numerical data for these cases.




                                            41
       1                                                      1

     0.8                                                     0.8

     0.6                                                     0.6

     0.4                                                     0.4

     0.2                                                     0.2

       0                                                      0
           0      0.2       0.4     0.6    0.8     1               0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1


       1                                                    0.4
                                                            0.3
     0.8                                                    0.2

     0.6                                                    0.1
                                                              0
     0.4                                                    -0.1
                                                            -0.2
     0.2
                                                            -0.3
       0                                                    -0.4
               -0.2     0         0.2     0.4    0.6               0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1


Figure 10: Dimensionless temperature and velocity profiles along the horizontal and vertical
centerlines in the primary mid-planes in natural convection in a cubic cavity at Ra = 105
and Pr = 0.71 computed using the 3D FPC-LBM (lines). Comparisons are made with the
prior numerical data of Num.A (Wang et al. (2017)) [65], Num.B (Fusegi et al. (1991)) [64],
and available experimental data of Exp.A (Bilski et al. (1986) at Ra = 1.89 × 105 ) [69], and
Exp.B (Crane (1983) at Ra = 1.03 × 105 ) [68].




                                                       42
       1                                              0.4

     0.8
                                                      0.2
     0.6
                                                        0
     0.4

                                                      -0.2
     0.2

       0                                              -0.4
            -0.1       0       0.1     0.2                   0   0.2        0.4   0.6        0.8   1


Figure 11: Dimensionless velocity profiles along the horizontal and vertical centerlines in
the primary mid-plane in natural convection in a cubic cavity at Ra = 106 and Pr = 0.71
computed using the 3D FPC-LBM (lines) . Comparisons are made with the prior numerical
data of Num.B (Fusegi et al. (1991)) [64], and available experimental data of Exp.A (Bilski
et al. (1986)) [69], and Exp.C (Briggs and Jones (1985)) [71].

   Moreover, by quantifying the dimensionless heat transfer rates, we tabulate the average
Nusselt number on the hot wall computed using the 3D FPC-LBMs and compare with prior
numerical solutions available in the literature for Ra = 105 , 106 , 107 , and 108 in Table 8.
Our results are seen to be in very good agreement with these different sources of reference
data.

                     Ra                   105          106             107              108
                 FPC- LBM               4.3500        8.6473      16.2419          29.6172
           Fugesi et al. (1991) [64]    4.3610        8.7700            -                -
            Tric et al. (2000) [72]     4.3370        8.6407      16.3427                -
           Wang et al. (2017) [65]           -           -        16.4153          29.9169
            Xu et al. (2019) [73]            -        8.6435      16.4032                -

Table 8: Comparison of the average Nusselt numbers computed using the 3D FPC-LBM
against reference numerical data of Fugesi et al. (1991) [64], Tric et al. (2000) [72], Wang
et al. (2017) [65], and Xu et al. for various Rayleigh numbers (Ra = 105 , 106 , 107 , and 108 )
with Pr = 0.71. All cases were simulated with a grid resolution of 128 × 128 × 128 except
for the final case of Ra = 108 which had a resolution of 160 × 160 × 160.




                                                 43
7    Numerical Stability Tests: Comparison of 3D FPC-LBM
     with 3D Central Moment LBM using Maxwell Distribution
Finally, we now demonstrate the numerical advantages of using the FPC-LBM for simulat-
ing thermo-hydrodynamics when compared to other recently developed advanced collision
models-based LBM in terms of significant stability improvements. We do this via the sim-
ulations of mixed convection involving shear flow combined with the presence of buoyancy
forces in a cubic cavity of side Lo , where the top wall is set into motion with a uniform
velocity Uo , while the other walls are stationary (see Fig. 12 for the problem setup). In
addition, the top wall is imposed with a uniform hot temperature while the bottom wall is
maintained at uniform cold temperature, and the remaining walls are considered adiabatic.
Moreover, we apply a gravitational body force under the usual Boussinesq approximation
so that both of the 3D FPC-LBMs for hydrodynamics and the energy equation are coupled.
This configuration is meant to initiate numerical instability in simulations under shear at
higher Mach numbers and with relatively coarse grid resolutions.




Figure 12: Schematic diagram for the numerical stability test involving mixed thermal
convection due to shear and buoyancy forces in a cubic cavity with the attendant thermal
boundary conditions. No slip velocity conditions are imposed on all wall surfaces, except
for the top which is specified to be moving at a velocity Uo .

    We will perform a systematic stability study for three different scenarios as will be dis-
cussed below. It involves using the 3D FPC-LBM and comparing it with the more recently
developed LBM using the central moments-based collision operators using the Maxwell
distribution function as the attractor [46–50] extended to 3D, i.e., which use Eq. (14) to
prescribe the discrete central moment equilibria for the D3Q27 lattice for hydrodynamics
via the matching principle and by replacing ρ with T in the same equation to construct the
corresponding discrete equilibrium central moments for the D3Q15 lattice for the energy
equation, again via matching. We do not include the older SRT and MRT collision models
as part of this comparative study as they are already known to be less stable compared to
the central moments-based collision models using the Maxwellian attractors (see e.g., [47]).
    The determination of stability/instability in numerical simulations√are determined as
follows. For a fixed grid resolution L3o , Mach number Ma = Uo /cs = 3Uo , and Prandtl

                                             44
number Pr = ν/α, when performing simulations using the FPC-LBM or the LBM using
Maxwellian-based central moment collision operator (henceforth referred to as the MCM-
LBM), we reduce the thermal diffusivity α, which is related to the relaxation parameters
of the first order moments for the LB solver for the temperature field, until the simulations
remain stable for 1 million (106 ) time steps; on the other hand, the simulations are deemed
unstable if the errors for the hydrodynamic or temperature fields grow large quickly (often
exponentially). Based on the minimum achievable thermal diffusivity α for a chosen Lo and
Uo , we determine the maximum stable dimensionless characteristic parameter for mixed
convection, viz., the Peclet number defined as Pe = Uo Lo /α in reporting the results of the
comparative study.
    Then, the three scenarios investigated are as follows: 1) For a fixed coarse resolution of
643 and a Prandtl number of Pr = 0.71, we consider a range of Mach numbers given by
Ma = 0.01, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.2, and 0.25 and in each case the maximum achievable stable
Peclet number Pe by simulations using the FPC-LBM and MCM-LBM are noted. 2) For
a fixed Prandtl number Pr = 0.71 and Mach number Ma = 0.25, we consider a range of
grid resolutions including 323 , 483 , 643 , and 803 , and determine the maximum stable Peclet
number Pe achieved by FPC-LBM and MCM-LBM. 3) For a fixed resolution of 643 , Mach
number Ma = 0.25, we take a range of Prandtl numbers Pr equal to 0.1, 0.71, 1.0, 2.0 and 5.0,
and deduce the maximum Pe for both FPC-LBM and MCM-LBM. The numerical stability
results obtained for these three scenarios are reported in Fig. 13. For all cases, the FPC-
LBM is found to be significantly more stable in the simulation of mixed convective flows.
The maximum stable Peclet number achieved by the FPC-LBM is seen to be several times
larger when compared to that reached by the MCM-LBM and the improvements become
greater at higher Prandtl numbers. Note that our previous study [33] showed that the
FPC-LBM superior to MCM-LBM in terms of stability characteristics for simulating fluid
motions without heat transfer. The present investigation further supports this conclusion
for simulations of coupled thermal flows under a wide range of conditions.




                                             45
Figure 13: Results from three sets of numerical stability studies, each finding the maxi-
mum possible Peclet number for stable simulations using 3D FPC-LBM and the 3D central
moment LBM using Maxwell distribution (referred to as the MCM-LBM) at various Mach
numbers (top left), grid resolutions, where Lo is the number of grid nodes resolving each side
of the cavity (top right), and Prandtl numbers (bottom). Simulations were run 106 time
steps without encountering numerical instabilities in each case. The use of the renormal-
ization principle in selecting the diffusion tensor parameter associated with the FPC-LBM
(see e.g., Sec. 5.1.1) facilitates its significant stability improvements over the MCM-LBM.

    To provide further perspective, we now discuss the relative computational costs of the LB
methods associated with different collision models. As such, depending on the computing
architecture used, the LB schemes are generally dominated by memory-bound operations
rather than compute-bound calculations involved with their collide-and-stream based algo-
rithms and hence using different collision models does not alter the overall computational
cost significantly. The Maxwellian central moment (MCM)-LBM and Fokker-Planck central
moment (FPC)-LBM have essentially the same computational efficiencies since modifying
the attractors in the collision step results in negligible differences in terms of the overall
operations involved. On the other hand, when comparing with the use of the simplest
among the collision models, namely the SRT-LBM, the FPC-LBM has up to about 50%
computational overhead associated with the additional transformations involved with the


                                             46
pre- and post-collision operations; however, this is offset by the dramatic advantages of the
FPC-LBM in delivering an order of magnitude or more improvements in numerical stability
in simulating flows at high Reynolds numbers or Peclet numbers when compared to such
collision models.
    Furthermore, the conventional numerical methods for incompressible flow simulations
involve the solution of the Poisson-type equation for the pressure field which limits their
scalability in using large parallel computing platforms effectively. On the other hand, the
collide-and-stream steps of the LBM are inherently parallel in nature and well suited for
implementations on such platforms. Our FPC-LBM for 3D thermal convective flow simu-
lations have been parallelized using the Message Passing Interface (MPI) libraries in C++
and implemented using a domain decomposition strategy on the parallel computer cluster
named INCLINE and hosted at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs (UCCS). It
was then tested with a domain resolved with 1283 grid nodes for measuring the speed-ups
in using the 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, and 256 computing cores over its implementation on
a single core on this cluster. Figure 14 presents a plot of the speed-up versus the number
of processor cores which shows that the 3D FPC-LBM implementation is scaling up quite
well and almost linearly thereby demonstrating its parallel computing advantages.




Figure 14: Speed-up versus the number of processor cores for simulation of thermal convec-
tive flows in a cubic cavity with a domain resolved with 1283 nodes using the 3D FPC-LBM
implemented on the parallel computer cluster INCLINE hosted at the University of Col-
orado at Colorado Springs (UCCS).

    Such natural scaling on parallel computer clusters can be exploited in simulating large-
scale problems. In particular, the 3D FPC-LBMs can be adapted for performing large-
eddy simulations of turbulent convective flows via utilizing appropriate subgrid scale (SGS)
turbulence models for the unresolved turbulent stresses and heat fluxes via eddy viscosity
and eddy thermal diffusivity, respectively. In this regard, the local eddy viscosity is used to
augment the relaxation parameters of the second order moments involved in the collision
step of the FPC-LBM for fluid motions and the eddy thermal diffusivity for adapting the
relaxation parameters of the first order moments utilized in the collision step of the FPC-
LBM for energy transport. These considerations pave the way towards simulating more

                                              47
complex thermal and flow transport problems of engineering interest.


8    Summary and Conclusions
Originally developed to characterize Brownian dynamics, the Fokker-Planck (FP) equation
represents an important element to represent non-equilibrium processes via the evolution
of particle density distribution functions in statistical mechanics and various other applica-
tions. It has also been suggested as a drift and diffusion based stochastic model for the col-
lision term of the Boltzmann equation. In our recent work, we developed a central moment
formulation of the FP collision operator with its implementation in the lattice Boltzmann
(LB) framework capable of robust numerical simulation of fluid dynamics especially at high
Reynolds numbers.
     In this work, we extend this approach for effective simulation of thermal convective
flows. We utilize a double distribution functions (DDF)-based formulation, where one con-
tinuous kinetic equation is used to recover the equations of fluid motions and the other
for the energy transport while endowing each of them with a FP central moment colli-
sion operator. By matching the changes in the discrete central moments under collision
with those of the continuous FP-based central moment collision model for each of these
kinetic equations, we develop novel LB schemes, referred to as the FPC-LBMs, for hydro-
dynamic fields and temperature fields in 2D using the D2Q9 lattice and in 3D using the
D3Q27 lattice for the former and D3Q15 lattice for the latter. In each case, they involve
the relaxations of different central moments to their ‘equilibria’, which are referred to as
the Markovian central moment attractors reflecting the repeated randomness inherent in
microscopic collision processes in fluids; such attractors depend on the products of lower
central moments and diffusion parameter tensors. The latter are parameterized as fixed
points of certain renormalization group equations involving the variations of the second
order moments under collision to enable effective simulations of hydrodynamics for a wide
range of transport coefficients without numerical artifacts due to the interference of higher
kinetic moments that can arise when there are disparities in the relaxation rates. Since
the number of collision invariants of the kinetic equations for recovering the fluid motions
and energy transport in the DDF approach are different, the resulting expressions of such
Markovian central moment attractors in the respective cases are quite distinct.
     The 2D and 3D FPC-LBMs are validated against prior numerical/experimental data
for the simulations of natural convection in square cavity and cubic cavity, respectively,
over a wide range of Rayleigh numbers, Ra. The computed velocity and temperature
profiles as well as the heat transfer rates based on the Nusselt number using the DDF-based
FP-LBMs are shown be in good quantitative agreement with existing benchmark results,
including those at higher Ra. Furthermore, we demonstrate that significant improvements
in numerical stability can be achieved when using the FPC-LBMs in lieu of other existing
central moment LBMs that use the Maxwellian distribution to prescribe equilibria in the
collision models for simulation of a shear-driven mixed thermal convective flow in a cubic
cavity. In particular, the FPC-LBMs are shown to be more stable in reaching markedly
higher Peclet numbers than that using the latter.
     The outlook on future work of this study has a number of possible directions for further
investigations. In addition to being promising for simulation of flows with thermal trans-

                                             48
port, the FPC-LBMs as developed in this work are directly applicable for simulating the
transport of any passive scalar (e.g., concentration of a tracer species or surfactants) under
diffusion and advection due to fluid motions. Since the FPC-LBM is capable of avoiding
hyperviscosity artifacts when simulating flows at relatively low physical viscosities, it can
be utilized effectively in large-eddy simulations of anisotropic turbulent flows including heat
transfer at high Reynolds numbers. Moreover, the method can be potentially extended for
other complex flows such as those involving non-Newtonian fluids and multiphase flows by
appropriate modifications of the FP-based central moment collision operator.


Acknowledgements
Early stages of this research were presented at the 2023 American Physical Society March
Meeting in Las Vegas, Nevada (https://meetings.aps.org/Meeting/MAR23/Session/T18.4).
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the US National Science Foundation
(NSF) for research under Grant CBET-1705630. Simulations were performed using the
high performance computing clusters Alderaan hosted at the Center for Computational
Mathematics at the University of Colorado Denver and funded by NSF under Grant OAC-
2019089, and INCLINE hosted at the University of Colorado Colorado Springs and funded
by NSF under Grant Number OAC-2017917.


A     Implementation of 2D FPC-LBM with D2Q9 lattice for
      computing fluid motions
We present the implementation details of solving the 2D NSE using the FPC-LBM with
the D2Q9 lattice in the following.
Step 1: Transform the pre-collision distribution functions into pre-collision raw moments
via m = Pf as

                    κ′00 = f0 + f1 + f2 + f3 + f4 + f5 + f6 + f7 + f8 ,                   (78)
                             ′
                            κ = f1 − f3 + f5 − f6 − f7 + f8 ,
                             10

                            κ′01 = f2 − f4 + f5 + f6 − f7 − f8 ,
                            κ′20 = f1 + f3 + f5 + f6 + f7 + f8 ,
                            κ′02 = f2 + f4 + f5 + f6 + f7 + f8 ,
                                  κ′11 = f5 − f6 + f7 − f8 ,
                                  κ′21 = f5 + f6 − f7 − f8 ,
                                  κ′12 = f5 − f6 − f7 + f8 ,
                                  κ′22 = f5 + f6 + f7 + f8 .

Step 2: Convert the pre-collision raw moments into pre-collision central moments via mc =
Fm as

                                         κ00 = κ′00 ,                                     (79)

                                                49
                                         κ10 = κ′10 − ux κ′00 ,

                                          κ01 = κ′01 − uy κ′00

                                   κ20 = κ′20 − 2ux κ′10 + u2x κ′00 ,

                                   κ02 = κ′02 − 2uy κ′01 + u2y κ′00 ,

                            κ11 = κ′11 − uy κ′10 − ux κ′01 + ux uy κ′00 ,

               κ21 = κ′21 − 2ux κ′11 + u2x κ′01 − uy κ′20 + 2ux uy κ′10 − u2x uy κ′00 ,

               κ12 = κ′12 − 2uy κ′11 + u2y κ′10 − ux κ′02 + 2ux uy κ′01 − ux u2y κ′00 ,

            κ22 = κ′22 − 2ux κ′12 + u2x κ′02 − 2uy κ′21 + 4ux uy κ′11 − u2x 2uy κ′01 + u2y κ′20
                     −2ux u2y κ′10 + u2x u2y κ′00 .

    Step 3: Collision update - Perform relaxation of all the 9 independent central moments
to their attractors for the D2Q9 lattice with additional contributions from source terms due
to the body force. First, we combine the diagonal second order central moments in order
to independently evolve the effects of shear and bulk viscosities as

                         κ2s = κ20 + κ02 ,                 κ2d = κ20 − κ02 .                      (80)

Then, we calculate the lower order Markovian central moment attractors based on the
following:

             κM v
              00 = ρ,               κM v
                                     10 = 0,                κM v
                                                             01 = 0,             κM v   2
                                                                                  20 = cs ρ,      (81)

             κM v   2
              02 = cs ρ,               κM v
                                        11 = 0,               κM v
                                                               21 = 0,               κM v
                                                                                      12 = 0,


where c2s = 1/3, and also combine the corresponding attractors and the sources (see Eq. (37))
in the same manner as

                       κM
                        2s
                           v
                             = κM v   Mv
                                20 + κ02 ,                    κM v   Mv    Mv
                                                               2d = κ20 − κ02 .

                        σ2s = σ20 + σ02 ,                        σ2d = σ20 − σ02 .

Next, perform relaxations under collision with source updates to obtain the post-collision
central moments κ̃mn up to the third order (i.e., m + n ≤ 3) as

                       κ̃00 = κ00 + ω0 (κM v
                                         00 − κ00 ) + (1 − ω0 /2) σ00 δt ,                        (82)

                       κ̃10 = κ10 + ω1 (κM v
                                         10 − κ10 ) + (1 − ω1 /2) σ10 δt ,


                       κ̃01 = κ01 + ω2 (κM v
                                         01 − κ01 ) + (1 − ω2 /2) σ01 δt ,


                       κ̃2s = κ2s + ω3 (κM v
                                         2s − κ2s ) + (1 − ω3 /2) σ2s δt ,


                       κ̃2d = κ2d + ω4 (κM v
                                         2d − κ2d ) + (1 − ω4 /2) σ2d δt ,


                       κ̃11 = κ11 + ω5 (κM v
                                         11 − κ11 ) + (1 − ω5 /2) σ11 δt ,



                                                      50
                      κ̃21 = κ21 + ω6 (κM v
                                        21 − κ21 ) + (1 − ω6 /2) σ21 δt ,


                      κ̃12 = κ12 + ω7 (κM v
                                        12 − κ12 ) + (1 − ω7 /2) σ12 δt ,


Here, σmn is provided in Eq. (37). Then, split the post-collision second order combined
central moments to obtain their individual contributions through

                   κ̃20 = 0.5(κ̃2s + κ̃2d ),                κ̃02 = 0.5(κ̃2s − κ̃2d ).              (83)

Using the above, we then specify the Markovian attractor for the fourth order central
moment based on post-collision second order central moments as
                                            1
                                  κM v
                                   22 =       (κ̃20 κ̃02 + 2κ̃11 κ̃11 ),                           (84)
                                            ρ
Finally, the fourth order central moment is updated under relaxation as

                       κ̃22 = κ22 + ω8 (κM v
                                         22 − κ22 ) + (1 − ω8 /2) σ22 .                            (85)

Step 4: Map post-collision central moments into post-collision raw moments using m̃ =
F−1 m̃c as

                                              κ̃′00 = κ̃00 ,                                       (86)

                                        κ̃′10 = κ̃10 + ux κ̃00 ,

                                        κ̃′01 = κ̃01 + uy κ̃00 ,

                                  κ̃′20 = κ̃20 + 2ux κ̃10 + u2x κ̃00 ,

                                  κ̃′02 = κ̃02 + 2uy κ̃01 + u2y κ̃00 ,

                            κ̃′11 = κ̃11 + ux κ̃01 + uy κ̃10 + ux uy κ̃00 ,

              κ̃′21 = κ̃21 + 2ux κ̃11 + uy κ̃20 + u2x κ̃01 + 2ux uy κ̃10 + u2x uy κ̃00 ,

              κ̃′12 = κ̃12 + 2uy κ̃11 + ux κ̃02 + 2ux uy κ̃01 + u2y κ̃10 + ux u2y κ̃00 ,

           κ̃′22 = κ̃22 + 2ux κ̃12 + 2uy κ̃21 + 4ux uy κ̃11 + u2y κ̃20 + u2x κ̃02 + 2u2x uy κ̃01
                    +2ux u2y κ̃10 + u2x u2y κ̃00 .

Step 5: Convert post-collision raw moments into post-collision distribution functions via
f̃ = P91 m̃ as

                                   f˜0 = κ̃′00 − κ̃′20 − κ̃′02 + κ̃′22 ,                           (87)

                                f˜1 = (κ̃′10 + κ̃′20 − κ̃′12 − κ̃′22 )/2,

                                f˜2 = (κ̃′01 + κ̃′02 − κ̃′21 − κ̃′22 )/2,

                              f˜3 = (−κ̃′10 + κ̃′20 + κ̃′12 − κ̃′22 )/2,

                              f˜4 = (−κ̃′01 + κ̃′02 + κ̃′21 − κ̃′22 )/2,

                                                      51
                             f˜5 = (κ̃′11 + κ̃′21 + κ̃′12 + κ̃′22 )/4,

                            f˜6 = (−κ̃′11 + κ̃′21 − κ̃′12 + κ̃′22 )/4,

                             f˜7 = (κ̃′11 − κ̃′21 − κ̃′12 + κ̃′22 )/4,

                            f˜8 = (−κ̃′11 − κ̃′21 + κ̃′12 + κ̃′22 )/4.

Step 6: Perform streaming step using the post-collision distribution functions for all the 9
directions of the D2Q9 lattice as

                   fα (x, t + δt ) = f˜α (x − eα δt , t),        α = 0, 1, 2, . . . , 8,   (88)

and implement the boundary conditions on the distribution functions as necessary.
Step 7: Calculate the fluid dynamical variables (i.e., the density and velocity) using the
zeroth and first moments of the distribution function as
                             8                      8
                             X                      X          1
                        ρ=         fα ,     ρu =        fα eα + F δt ,                     (89)
                             α=0                    α=0
                                                               2

and pressure P = ρc2s . The choice of the relaxation parameters ωj , which satisfy 0 < ωj < 2,
in the above are as follows. We select the relaxation parameters for the second order
moments ω3 and ω4 = ω5 based on the transport coefficients of the fluid, viz., its bulk and
shear viscosities, ζ and ν, respectively, according to (see [33])
                                                                   
                    2   1    1             2   1    1         2   1   1
             ζ = cs       −      δt , ν = cs      −     δt = cs     −     δt .            (90)
                        ω3 2                   ω4 2               ω5 2

To recover the 2D NSE in the incompressible limit, the shear viscosity ν is the only relevant
physical property, which is, in turn, based on the Reynolds number obtained from the flow
problem statement; hence ω4 and ω5 is chosen using ν based on Eq. (90). The remaining ωj ,
where j = 0, 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, are free parameters and are selected based on numerical stability
considerations. We set them to be equal to 1.0 in this work. As such, the Steps 1 through 7
represent one complete step of the FPC-LBM with a time step δt to simulate hydrodynamics.


B     Implementation of 2D FPC-LBM with D2Q9 lattice for
      computing temperature field
We present the implementation details of solving the 2D energy equation using the FPC-
LBM with the D2Q9 lattice in the following.
Step 1: Transform the pre-collision distribution functions into pre-collision raw moments
via n = Pg as
                     ′
                    η00 = g0 + g1 + g2 + g3 + g4 + g5 + g6 + g7 + g8 ,                     (91)
                             ′
                            η10 = g1 − g3 + g5 − g6 − g7 + g8 ,
                             ′
                            η01 = g2 − g4 + g5 + g6 − g7 − g8 ,

                                                  52
                              ′
                             η20 = g1 + g3 + g5 + g6 + g7 + g8 ,
                              ′
                             η02 = g2 + g4 + g5 + g6 + g7 + g8 ,
                                    ′
                                   η11 = g5 − g6 + g7 − g8 ,
                                    ′
                                   η21 = g5 + g6 − g7 − g8 ,
                                    ′
                                   η12 = g5 − g6 − g7 + g8 ,
                                    ′
                                   η22 = g5 + g6 + g7 + g8 .

Step 2: Convert the pre-collision raw moments into pre-collision central moments via nc =
Fn as
                                                   ′
                                            η00 = η00 ,                                    (92)
                                              ′        ′
                                       η10 = η10 − ux η00 ,
                                              ′        ′
                                       η01 = η01 − uy η00
                                        ′         ′         ′
                                 η20 = η20 − 2ux η10 + u2x η00 ,
                                        ′         ′         ′
                                 η02 = η02 − 2uy η01 + u2y η00 ,
                                  ′        ′        ′           ′
                           η11 = η11 − uy η10 − ux η01 + ux uy η00 ,
                      ′         ′         ′        ′            ′            ′
               η21 = η21 − 2ux η11 + u2x η01 − uy η20 + 2ux uy η10 − u2x uy η00 ,
                      ′
               η12 = η12                   ′
                         − 2uy κ′11 + u2y η10       ′
                                              − ux η02           ′
                                                       + 2ux uy η01           ′
                                                                    − ux u2y η00 ,
                   ′         ′         ′         ′            ′             ′         ′
            η22 = η22 − 2ux η12 + u2x η02 − 2uy η21 + 4ux uy η11 − u2x 2uy η01 + u2y η20
                              ′             ′
                    −2ux u2y η10 + u2x u2y η00 .

Step 3: Collision update - Perform relaxation of all the 9 independent central moments to
their attractors for the D2Q9 lattice. First, we calculate the lower order Markovian central
moment attractors based on the following:
                        Mv                      Mv                  Mv
                       η00 = T,                η10 = 0,            η01 = 0,
                        Mv
                       η20 = ĉ2s T,           Mv
                                              η02 = ĉ2s T,         Mv
                                                                   η11 = 0,                (93)

where ĉ2s = 1/3. Next, perform relaxations under collision with source updates to obtain
the post-collision central moments η̃mn up to the second order (i.e., m + n ≤ 2) as
                                                   Mv
                                 η̃00 = η00 + ω0 (η00 − η00 ),                             (94)
                                                   Mv
                                 η̃10 = η10 + ω1 (η10 − η10 ),
                                                   Mv
                                 η̃01 = η01 + ω2 (η01 − η01 ),
                                                   Mv
                                 η̃2s = η2s + ω3 (η2s − η2s ),
                                                   Mv
                                 η̃2d = η2d + ω4 (η2d − η2d ),

                                                   53
                                                      Mv
                                    η̃11 = η11 + ω5 (η11 − η11 ).

Using the above, we then specify the Markovian attractors for the third order central mo-
ments based on post-collision first order moments, and for the fourth order central moment
based on post-collision second order central moments as follows:

                    Mv  2                         2                      1
                   η21 = ĉ2s η̃01 ,          Mv
                                             η12 = ĉ2s η̃10 ,       Mv
                                                                    η22 = ĉ2s (η̃20 + η̃02 ) .    (95)
                        3                         3                      2
Following these, finally, the third and fourth order central moments are updated under
relaxation as
                                                      Mv
                                    η̃21 = η21 + ω6 (η21 − η21 ),
                                                      Mv
                                    η̃12 = η12 + ω7 (η12 − η12 ),
                                                      Mv
                                    η̃22 = η22 + ω8 (η22 − η22 ).                                  (96)

Step 4: Map post-collision central moments into post-collision raw moments using ñ = F−1 ñc
as
                                                  ′
                                                η̃00 = η̃00 ,                                      (97)
                                            ′
                                          η̃10 = η̃10 + ux η̃00 ,
                                            ′
                                          η̃01 = η̃01 + uy η̃00 ,
                                      ′
                                    η̃20 = η̃20 + 2ux η̃10 + u2x η̃00 ,
                                      ′
                                    η̃02 = η̃02 + 2uy η̃01 + u2y η̃00 ,
                               ′
                             η̃11 = η̃11 + ux η̃01 + uy η̃10 + ux uy η̃00 ,
                  ′
                η̃21 = η̃21 + 2ux η̃11 + uy η̃20 + u2x η̃01 + 2ux uy η̃10 + u2x uy η̃00 ,
                  ′
                η̃12 = η̃12 + 2uy η̃11 + ux η̃02 + 2ux uy η̃01 + u2y η̃10 + ux u2y η̃00 ,
              ′
            η̃22 = η̃22 + 2ux η̃12 + 2uy η̃21 + 4ux uy η̃11 + u2y η̃20 + u2x η̃02 + 2u2x uy η̃01
                      +2ux u2y η̃10 + u2x u2y η̃00 .

Step 5: Convert post-collision raw moments into post-collision distribution functions via
g̃ = P91 ñ as
                                             ′      ′      ′      ′
                                     g̃0 = η̃00 − η̃20 − η̃02 + η̃22 ,                             (98)
                                           ′      ′      ′      ′
                                  g̃1 = (η̃10 + η̃20 − η̃12 − η̃22 )/2,
                                           ′      ′      ′      ′
                                  g̃2 = (η̃01 + η̃02 − η̃21 − η̃22 )/2,
                                          ′      ′      ′      ′
                                g̃3 = (−η̃10 + η̃20 + η̃12 − η̃22 )/2,
                                          ′      ′      ′      ′
                                g̃4 = (−η̃01 + η̃02 + η̃21 − η̃22 )/2,
                                           ′      ′      ′      ′
                                  g̃5 = (η̃11 + η̃21 + η̃12 + η̃22 )/4,

                                                       54
                                        ′      ′      ′      ′
                              g̃6 = (−η̃11 + η̃21 − η̃12 + η̃22 )/4,
                                        ′      ′      ′      ′
                               g̃7 = (η̃11 − η̃21 − η̃12 + η̃22 )/4,
                                        ′      ′      ′      ′
                              g̃8 = (−η̃11 − η̃21 + η̃12 + η̃22 )/4.

Step 6: Perform streaming step using the post-collision distribution functions for all the 9
directions of the D2Q9 lattice as

                     gα (x, t + δt ) = g̃α (x − eα δt , t),    α = 0, 1, 2, . . . , 8,        (99)

and implement the boundary conditions on the distribution functions as necessary.
Step 7: Compute the temperature field via zeroth moment of the distribution function as
                                                8
                                                X
                                          T =         gα .                                   (100)
                                                α=0


The choice of the relaxation parameters ωj , which satisfy 0 < ωj < 2, in the above are as
follows. We select the relaxation parameters for the first order moments ω1 = ω2 based on
the thermal transport coefficient of the fluid, viz., thermal diffusivity, α (which is related
to the Rayleigh number or Peclet number based on the thermal flow problem statement)
according to
                                                         
                               2   1   1          2   1   1
                         α = ĉs     −     δt = ĉs     −     δt .                       (101)
                                   ω1 2               ω2 2
so that the 2D equation of the convection and diffusion transport of energy is recovered.
The remaining ωj , where j = 0, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, are free parameters and are selected based on
numerical stability considerations. We set them to be equal to 1.0 in this work. As such,
the Steps 1 through 7 represent one complete step of the FPC-LBM with a time step δt to
simulate energy transport.


C     Implementation of 3D FPC-LBM with D3Q15 lattice for
      computing temperature field
We present the implementation details of solving the 3D energy equation using the FPC-
LBM with the D3Q15 lattice in the following.
Step 1: Transform the pre-collision distribution functions into pre-collision raw moments
via n = Pg as
     ′
    η000 = g0 + g1 + g2 + g3 + g4 + g5 + g6 + g7 + g8 + g9 + g10 + g11 + g12 + g13 + g14 ,
                 ′
                η100 = g1 − g2 + g7 − g8 + g9 − g10 + g11 − g12 + g13 − g14 ,
                 ′
                η010 = g3 − g4 + g7 + g8 − g9 − g10 + g11 + g12 − g13 − g14 ,
                 ′
                η001 = g5 − g6 + g7 + g8 + g9 + g10 − g11 − g12 − g13 − g14 ,
                      ′
                     η110 = g7 − g8 − g9 + g10 + g11 − g12 − g13 + g14 ,

                                                  55
                         ′
                        η101 = g7 − g8 + g9 − g10 − g11 + g12 − g13 + g14 ,
                         ′
                        η011 = g7 + g8 − g9 − g10 − g11 − g12 + g13 + g14 ,
                   ′
                  η200 = g1 + g2 + g7 + g8 + g9 + g10 + g11 + g12 + g13 + g14 ,
                   ′
                  η020 = g3 + g4 + g7 + g8 + g9 + g10 + g11 + g12 + g13 + g14 ,
                   ′
                  η002 = g5 + g6 + g7 + g8 + g9 + g10 + g11 + g12 + g13 + g14 ,
                         ′
                        η120 = g7 − g8 + g9 − g10 + g11 − g12 + g13 − g14 ,
                         ′
                        η012 = g7 + g8 − g9 − g10 + g11 + g12 − g13 − g14 ,
                         ′
                        η201 = g7 + g8 + g9 + g10 − g11 − g12 − g13 − g14 ,
                         ′
                        η111 = g7 − g8 − g9 + g10 − g11 + g12 + g13 − g14 ,
                         ′
                        η220 = g7 + g8 + g9 + g10 + g11 + g12 + g13 + g14 .

Step 2: Convert the pre-collision raw moments into pre-collision central moments via nc =
Fn as
                                                      ′
                                              η000 = η000 ,                                             (102)
                                                 ′         ′
                                         η100 = η100 − ux η000 ,
                                                 ′         ′
                                         η010 = η010 − uy η000 ,
                                                 ′         ′
                                         η001 = η001 − uz η000 ,
                                     ′         ′         ′            ′
                             η110 = η110 − ux η010 − uy η100 + ux uy η000 ,
                                     ′         ′         ′            ′
                             η101 = η101 − ux η001 − uz η100 + ux uz η000 ,
                                     ′         ′         ′            ′
                             η011 = η011 − uy η001 − uz η010 + uy uz η000 ,
                                           ′          ′          ′
                                   η200 = η200 − 2ux η100 + u2x η000 ,
                                           ′          ′          ′
                                   η020 = η020 − 2uy η010 + u2y η000 ,
                                           ′          ′          ′
                                   η002 = η002 − 2uz η001 + u2z η000 ,
                       ′         ′          ′          ′             ′             ′
               η120 = η120 − ux η020 − 2uy η110 + u2y η100 + 2ux uy η010 − ux u2y η000 ,
                        ′         ′          ′          ′             ′             ′
                η012 = η012 − uy η002 − 2uz η011 + u2z η010 + 2uy uz η001 − uy u2z η000 ,
                       ′          ′         ′          ′             ′             ′
               η201 = η201 − 2ux η101 − uz η200 + u2x η001 + 2ux uz η100 − u2x uz η000 ,
          ′         ′         ′         ′            ′            ′            ′               ′
  η111 = η111 − ux η011 − uy η101 − uz η110 + ux uy η001 + ux uz η010 + uy uz η100 − ux uy uz η000 ,
        ′          ′          ′          ′          ′             ′              ′              ′              ′
η220 = η220 − 2ux η120 − 2uy η012 + u2x η020 + u2y η200 + 4ux uy η110 − 2ux u2y η100 − 2u2x uy η010 + u2x u2y η000 .

                                                      56
Step 3: Collision update - Perform relaxation of all the 9 independent central moments to
their attractors for the D2Q9 lattice. First, we calculate the lower order Markovian central
moment attractors based on the following:
      Mv                      Mv                        Mv                     Mv              Mv
     η000 = T,               η100 = 0,                 η010 = 0,              η001 = 0,       η110 = 0,
      Mv                      Mv                       Mv
     η101 = 0,               η011 = 0,                η200 = ĉ2s T,          Mv
                                                                             η020 = ĉ2s T,    Mv
                                                                                              η002 = ĉ2s T,

where ĉ2s = 1/3. Next, perform relaxations under collision with source updates to obtain
the post-collision central moments η̃mnp up to the second order (i.e., m + n + p ≤ 2) as
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃000 = η000 + ω0 (η000 − η000 ),
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃100 = η100 + ω1 (η100 − η100 ),
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃010 = η010 + ω2 (η010 − η010 ),
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃001 = η001 + ω3 (η001 − η001 ),
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃110 = η110 + ω4 (η110 − η110 ),
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃101 = η101 + ω5 (η101 − η101 ),
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃011 = η011 + ω6 (η011 − η011 ),
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃200 = η200 + ω7 (η200 − η200 ),
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃020 = η020 + ω8 (η020 − η020 ),
                                                       Mv
                                   η̃002 = η002 + ω9 (η002 − η002 ),

Using the above, we then specify the Markovian attractor for the third order central mo-
ments based on post-collision first order moments, and for the fourth order central moment
based on post-collision second order central moments as follows:

        Mv   2                                2                              2
       η120 = ĉ2s η̃100 ,               Mv
                                        η012 = ĉ2s η̃010 ,             Mv
                                                                       η201 = ĉ2s η̃001 ,      Mv
                                                                                               η111 = 0,
             3                                3                              3
        Mv   1
       η220 = ĉ2s (η̃200 + η̃020 ) .                                                                  (103)
             2
Following these, finally, the third and fourth order central moments are updated under
relaxation as
                                                        Mv
                                   η̃120 = η120 + ω10 (η120 − η120 ),
                                                        Mv
                                   η̃012 = η012 + ω11 (η012 − η012 ),
                                                        Mv
                                   η̃201 = η201 + ω12 (η201 − η201 ),
                                                        Mv
                                   η̃111 = η111 + ω13 (η111 − η111 ),
                                                        Mv
                                   η̃220 = η220 + ω14 (η220 − η220 ).

                                                         57
Step 4: Map post-collision central moments into post-collision raw moments using ñ = F−1 ñc
as
                                                   ′
                                                 η̃000 = η̃000 ,
                                             ′
                                           η̃100 = η̃100 + ux η̃000 ,
                                              ′
                                            η̃010 = η̃010 + uy η̃000 ,
                                              ′
                                            η̃001 = η̃001 + uz η̃000 ,
                                ′
                              η̃110 = η̃110 + ux η̃010 + uy η̃100 + ux uy η̃000 ,
                                ′
                              η̃101 = η̃101 + ux η̃001 + uz η̃100 + ux uz η̃000 ,
                                ′
                              η̃011 = η̃011 + uy η̃001 + uz η̃010 + uy uz η̃000 ,
                                       ′
                                     η̃200 = η̃200 + 2ux η̃100 + u2x η̃000 ,
                                       ′
                                     η̃020 = η̃020 + 2uy η̃010 + u2y η̃000 ,
                                       ′
                                     η̃002 = η̃002 + 2uz η̃001 + u2z η̃000 ,
                  ′
                η̃120 = η̃120 + ux η̃020 + 2uy η̃110 + u2y η̃100 + 2ux uy η̃010 + ux u2y η̃000 ,
                  ′
                η̃012 = η̃012 + uy η̃002 + 2uz η̃011 + u2z η̃010 + 2uy uz η̃001 + uy u2z η̃000 ,
                  ′
                η̃201 = η̃201 + 2ux η̃101 + uz η̃200 + u2x η̃001 + 2ux uz η̃100 + u2x uz η̃000 ,
    ′
  η̃111 = η̃111 + ux η̃011 + uy η̃101 + uz η̃110 + ux uy η̃001 + ux uz η̃010 + uy uz η̃100 + ux uy uz η̃000 ,
       ′
     η̃220 = η̃220 + 2ux η̃120 + 2uy η̃012 − u2y η̃200 + u2x η̃020 + 2u2y η̃002 + 4uy uz η̃011 − 2ux u2y η̃100
                +2uy u2z η̃010 + 4u2y uz η̃001 − (u2x u2y − 2u2y u2z )η̃000 .

Step 5: Convert post-collision raw moments into post-collision distribution functions via
g̃ = P91 ñ as
                                        ′       ′       ′       ′        ′
                                g̃0 = η̃000 − η̃002 − η̃020 − η̃200 + 2η̃220 ,
                                            ′       ′       ′       ′
                                   g̃1 = (η̃100 − η̃120 + η̃200 − η̃220 )/2,
                                            ′       ′       ′       ′
                                   g̃2 = (η̃120 − η̃100 + η̃200 − η̃220 )/2,
                                            ′       ′       ′       ′
                                   g̃3 = (η̃010 − η̃012 + η̃020 − η̃220 )/2,
                                            ′       ′       ′       ′
                                   g̃4 = (η̃012 − η̃010 + η̃020 − η̃220 )/2,
                                            ′       ′       ′       ′
                                   g̃5 = (η̃001 + η̃002 − η̃201 − η̃220 )/2,
                                            ′       ′       ′       ′
                                   g̃6 = (η̃002 − η̃001 + η̃201 − η̃220 )/2,
                          ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′
                 g̃7 = (η̃011 + η̃012 + η̃101 + η̃110 + η̃111 + η̃120 + η̃201 + η̃220 )/8,
                          ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′
                 g̃8 = (η̃011 + η̃012 − η̃101 − η̃110 − η̃111 − η̃120 + η̃201 + η̃220 )/8,

                                                          58
                        ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′
               g̃9 = (η̃101 − η̃012 − η̃011 − η̃110 − η̃111 + η̃120 + η̃201 + η̃220 )/8,
                         ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′
               g̃10 = (η̃110 − η̃012 − η̃101 − η̃011 + η̃111 − η̃120 + η̃201 + η̃220 )/8,
                         ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′
               g̃11 = (η̃012 − η̃011 − η̃101 + η̃110 − η̃111 + η̃120 − η̃201 + η̃220 )/8,
                         ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′
               g̃12 = (η̃012 − η̃011 + η̃101 − η̃110 + η̃111 − η̃120 − η̃201 + η̃220 )/8,
                         ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′
               g̃13 = (η̃011 − η̃012 − η̃101 − η̃110 + η̃111 + η̃120 − η̃201 + η̃220 )/8,
                         ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′       ′
               g̃14 = (η̃011 − η̃012 + η̃101 + η̃110 − η̃111 − η̃120 − η̃201 + η̃220 )/8.

Step 6: Perform streaming step using the post-collision distribution functions for all the 15
directions of the D3Q15 lattice as

                    gα (x, t + δt ) = g̃α (x − eα δt , t),       α = 0, 1, 2, . . . , 14,     (104)

and implement the boundary conditions on the distribution functions as necessary.
Step 7: Compute the temperature field via zeroth moment of the distribution function as
                                                  14
                                                  X
                                            T =          gα .                                 (105)
                                                   α=0


The choice of the relaxation parameters ωj , which satisfy 0 < ωj < 2, in the above are as
follows. We select the relaxation parameters for the first order moments ω1 = ω2 = ω3 based
on the thermal transport coefficient of the fluid, viz., thermal diffusivity, α (which is related
to the Rayleigh number or Peclet number based on the thermal flow problem statement)
according to
                                                                   
                     2    1    1          2   1   1          2   1    1
               α = ĉs      −      δt = ĉs     −     δt = ĉs     −      δt .              (106)
                         ω1 2                 ω2 2               ω3 2

so that the 3D equation of the convection and diffusion transport of energy is recovered.
The remaining ωj , where j = 0, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, are free parameters and are
selected based on numerical stability considerations. We set them to be equal to 1.0 in this
work. As such, the Steps 1 through 7 represent one complete step of the FPC-LBM with a
time step δt to simulate energy transport.




                                                     59
References
 [1] WJ Minkowycz, EM Sparrow, JY Murthy, and John P Abraham. Handbook of nu-
     merical heat transfer. 2009.

 [2] Manoj Kumar Tripathi and Kirti Chandra Sahu. Motion of an air bubble under the
     action of thermocapillary and buoyancy forces. Computers & Fluids, 177:58–68, 2018.

 [3] Bashir Elbousefi, William Schupbach, Kannan N Premnath, and Samuel WJ Welch.
     Thermocapillary convection in superimposed layers of self-rewetting fluids: Analytical
     and lattice Boltzmann computational study. International Journal of Heat and Mass
     Transfer, 208:124049, 2023.

 [4] Palas Kumar Farsoiya, Stéphane Popinet, Howard A Stone, and Luc Deike. Coupled
     volume of fluid and phase field method for direct numerical simulation of insoluble
     surfactant-laden interfacial flows and application to rising bubbles. Physical Review
     Fluids, 9(9):094004, 2024.

 [5] Bashir Elbousefi, William Schupbach, Kannan N Premnath, and Samuel WJ Welch.
     Investigation of surfactant-laden bubble migration dynamics in self-rewetting fluids
     using lattice Boltzmann method. Physics of Fluids, 36(11), 2024.

 [6] Lin Li, Pu Xu, Qihan Li, Zichao Yin, Runyuan Zheng, Jiafeng Wu, Jiaji Bao, Wenyu
     Bai, Huan Qi, and Dapeng Tan. Multi-field coupling particle flow dynamic behaviors
     of the microreactor and ultrasonic control method. Powder Technology, page 120731,
     2025.

 [7] Gaoan Zheng, Pu Xu, Tong Wang, and Qing Yan. Study on the bubble collapse
     characteristics and heat transfer mechanism of the microchannel reactor. Processes,
     13(1):281, 2025.

 [8] Eric D Siggia. High Rayleigh number convection. Annual review of fluid mechanics,
     26(1):137–168, 1994.

 [9] Richard H Pletcher, John C Tannehill, and Dale Anderson. Computational fluid me-
     chanics and heat transfer. CRC press, 2012.

[10] Joel H Ferziger, Milovan Perić, and Robert L Street. Computational methods for fluid
     dynamics. springer, 2019.

[11] Wim A Mulder. A new multigrid approach to convection problems. Journal of Com-
     putational Physics, 83(2):303–323, 1989.

[12] Nader Ben Cheikh, Brahim Ben Beya, and Taieb Lili. Benchmark solution for time-
     dependent natural convection flows with an accelerated full-multigrid method. Numer-
     ical Heat Transfer, Part B: Fundamentals, 52(2):131–151, 2007.

[13] Nelson O Moraga, Marcelo A Marambio, and Roberto C Cabrales. Geometric multigrid
     technique for solving heat convection-diffusion and phase change problems. Interna-
     tional Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, 88:108–119, 2017.

                                            60
[14] Roberto Benzi, Sauro Succi, and Massimo Vergassola. The lattice Boltzmann equation:
     theory and applications. Physics Reports, 222(3):145–197, 1992.

[15] Shiyi Chen and Gary D Doolen. Lattice Boltzmann method for fluid flows. Annual
     review of fluid mechanics, 30(1):329–364, 1998.

[16] Pierre Lallemand, Li-shi Luo, Manfred Krafczyk, and Wen-An Yong. The lattice
     Boltzmann method for nearly incompressible flows. Journal of Computational Physics,
     431:109713, 2021.

[17] Haowen Xi, Gongwen Peng, and So-Hsiang Chou. Finite-volume lattice Boltzmann
     method. Physical Review E, 59(5):6202, 1999.

[18] Dhiraj V Patil and KN Lakshmisha. Finite volume tvd formulation of lattice Boltzmann
     simulation on unstructured mesh. Journal of Computational Physics, 228(14):5262–
     5279, 2009.

[19] Ahad Zarghami, Stefano Ubertini, and Sauro Succi. Finite volume formulation of
     thermal lattice Boltzmann method. International Journal of Numerical Methods for
     Heat & Fluid Flow, 24(2):270–289, 2014.

[20] Weidong Li and Li-Shi Luo. Finite volume lattice Boltzmann method for nearly incom-
     pressible flows on arbitrary unstructured meshes. Communications in Computational
     Physics, 20(2):301–324, 2016.

[21] Xiaoyi He and Li-Shi Luo. Theory of the lattice Boltzmann method: From the Boltz-
     mann equation to the lattice Boltzmann equation. Physical review E, 56(6):6811, 1997.

[22] Cyrus K Aidun and Jonathan R Clausen. Lattice-Boltzmann method for complex
     flows. Annual review of fluid mechanics, 42(1):439–472, 2010.

[23] Leila Jahanshaloo, Emad Pouryazdanpanah, and Nor Azwadi Che Sidik. A review
     on the application of the lattice Boltzmann method for turbulent flow simulation.
     Numerical Heat Transfer, Part A: Applications, 64(11):938–953, 2013.

[24] Qing Li, Kai Hong Luo, QJ Kang, YL He, Q Chen, and Q Liu. Lattice boltzmann
     methods for multiphase flow and phase-change heat transfer. Progress in Energy and
     Combustion Science, 52:62–105, 2016.

[25] Keerti Vardhan Sharma, Robert Straka, and Frederico Wanderley Tavares. Current
     status of lattice Boltzmann methods applied to aerodynamic, aeroacoustic, and thermal
     flows. Progress in Aerospace Sciences, 115:100616, 2020.

[26] Yue-Hong Qian, Dominique d’Humières, and Pierre Lallemand. Lattice BGK models
     for Navier-Stokes equation. Europhysics letters, 17(6):479, 1992.

[27] Dominique d’Humieres. Generalized lattice-Boltzmann equations. Rarefied gas dynam-
     ics, 1992.



                                           61
[28] Dominique d’Humières. Multiple–relaxation–time lattice Boltzmann models in three
     dimensions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Math-
     ematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 360(1792):437–451, 2002.

[29] Martin Geier, Andreas Greiner, and Jan G Korvink. Cascaded digital lattice Boltzmann
     automata for high reynolds number flow. Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear,
     and Soft Matter Physics, 73(6):066705, 2006.

[30] Yang Ning, Kannan N Premnath, and Dhiraj V Patil. Numerical study of the properties
     of the central moment lattice Boltzmann method. International Journal for Numerical
     Methods in Fluids, 82(2):59–90, 2016.

[31] Martin Geier, Andreas Greiner, and Jan G Korvink. A factorized central moment
     lattice Boltzmann method. The European Physical Journal Special Topics, 171(1):55–
     61, 2009.

[32] Martin Geier, Martin Schönherr, Andrea Pasquali, and Manfred Krafczyk. The cumu-
     lant lattice Boltzmann equation in three dimensions: Theory and validation. Computers
     & Mathematics with Applications, 70(4):507–547, 2015.

[33] William Schupbach and Kannan Premnath. Fokker-planck central moment lattice
     Boltzmann method for effective simulations of fluid dynamics. Fluids, 9(11):255, 2024.

[34] Nicolaas Godfried Van Kampen. Stochastic processes in physics and chemistry, vol-
     ume 1. Elsevier, 1992.

[35] Nelson Wax. Selected papers on noise and stochastic processes. Courier Corporation,
     2014.

[36] Linda E Reichl. A modern course in statistical physics. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.

[37] James H Luscombe. Statistical mechanics: from thermodynamics to the renormaliza-
     tion group. CRC Press, 2021.

[38] Andrei Medved, Riley Davis, and Paula A Vasquez. Understanding fluid dynamics
     from Langevin and Fokker–Planck equations. Fluids, 5(1):40, 2020.

[39] JL Lebowitz, HL Frisch, and E Helfand. Nonequilibrium distribution functions in a
     fluid. The Physics of Fluids, 3(3):325–338, 1960.

[40] Carlo Cercignani. The Boltzmann Equation and Its Applications. Springer-Verlag, New
     York, 1988.

[41] Timm Krüger, Halim Kusumaatmaja, Alexandr Kuzmin, Orest Shardt, Goncalo Silva,
     and Erlend Magnus Viggen. The lattice Boltzmann method. Springer International
     Publishing, 10:978–3, 2017.

[42] Xiaoyi He, Shiyi Chen, and Gary D Doolen. A novel thermal model for the lat-
     tice Boltzmann method in incompressible limit. Journal of computational physics,
     146(1):282–300, 1998.

                                            62
[43] Zhaoli Guo, Baochang Shi, and Chuguang Zheng. A coupled lattice BGK model for
     the Boussinesq equations. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids,
     39(4):325–342, 2002.

[44] Jia Wang, Donghai Wang, Pierre Lallemand, and Li-Shi Luo. Lattice boltzmann simu-
     lations of thermal convective flows in two dimensions. Computers & Mathematics with
     Applications, 65(2):262–286, 2013.

[45] Dario Contrino, Pierre Lallemand, Pietro Asinari, and Li-Shi Luo. Lattice-Boltzmann
     simulations of the thermally driven 2d square cavity at high Rayleigh numbers. Journal
     of Computational Physics, 275:257–272, 2014.

[46] Keerti Vardhan Sharma, Robert Straka, and Frederico Wanderley Tavares. Natural
     convection heat transfer modeling by the cascaded thermal lattice Boltzmann method.
     International Journal of Thermal Sciences, 134:552–564, 2018.

[47] Fatma M Elseid, Samuel WJ Welch, and Kannan N Premnath. A cascaded lattice
     Boltzmann model for thermal convective flows with local heat sources. International
     Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow, 70:279–298, 2018.

[48] Linlin Fei, Kai Hong Luo, Chuandong Lin, and Qing Li. Modeling incompressible
     thermal flows using a central-moments-based lattice Boltzmann method. International
     Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 120:624–634, 2018.

[49] Farzaneh Hajabdollahi and Kannan N Premnath. Central moments-based cascaded lat-
     tice Boltzmann method for thermal convective flows in three-dimensions. International
     Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 120:838–850, 2018.

[50] Farzaneh Hajabdollahi, Kannan N Premnath, and Samuel WJ Welch. Cascaded lattice
     Boltzmann method based on central moments for axisymmetric thermal flows including
     swirling effects. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 128:999–1016, 2019.

[51] Gilberto M Kremer. An introduction to the Boltzmann equation and transport processes
     in gases. Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.

[52] Prabhu Lal Bhatnagar, Eugene P Gross, and Max Krook. A model for collision pro-
     cesses in gases. I. Small amplitude processes in charged and neutral one-component
     systems. Physical review, 94(3):511, 1954.

[53] Tamas I Gombosi. Gaskinetic theory. Number 9. Cambridge University Press, New
     York, 1994.

[54] Richard L Liboff. Kinetic theory: classical, quantum, and relativistic descriptions.
     Springer Science & Business Media, 2003.

[55] Lin-Yuan Chen, Nigel Goldenfeld, and Yoshitsugu Oono. Renormalization group and
     singular perturbations: Multiple scales, boundary layers, and reductive perturbation
     theory. Physical Review E, 54(1):376, 1996.



                                            63
[56] Nigel Goldenfeld. Lectures on phase transitions and the renormalization group. CRC
     Press, 2018.

[57] Gabriel T Csanady. Turbulent diffusion in the environment, volume 3. Springer Science
     & Business Media, 2012.

[58] Kannan N Premnath and Sanjoy Banerjee. Inertial frame independent forcing for
     discrete velocity Boltzmann equation: implications for filtered turbulence simulation.
     Communications in Computational Physics, 12(3):732–766, 2012.

[59] Xiaoyi He, Shiyi Chen, and Raoyang Zhang. A lattice Boltzmann scheme for incom-
     pressible multiphase flow and its application in simulation of Rayleigh-Taylor instabil-
     ity. Journal of Computational Physics, 152(2):642–663, 1999.

[60] Eman Yahia and Kannan N Premnath. Central moment lattice Boltzmann method on
     a rectangular lattice. Physics of Fluids, 33(5), 2021.

[61] Graham de Vahl Davis. Natural convection of air in a square cavity: a bench mark
     numerical solution. International Journal for numerical methods in fluids, 3(3):249–
     264, 1983.

[62] M Hortmann, M Perić, and G Scheuerer. Finite volume multigrid prediction of laminar
     natural convection: bench-mark solutions. International journal for numerical methods
     in fluids, 11(2):189–207, 1990.

[63] HN Dixit and V Babu. Simulation of high Rayleigh number natural convection in a
     square cavity using the lattice Boltzmann method. International journal of heat and
     mass transfer, 49(3-4):727–739, 2006.

[64] Toru Fusegi, Jae Min Hyun, and Kunio Kuwahara. A numerical study of 3D natural
     convection in a cube: effects of the horizontal thermal boundary conditions. Fluid
     dynamics research, 8(5-6):221, 1991.

[65] Peng Wang, Yonghao Zhang, and Zhaoli Guo. Numerical study of three-dimensional
     natural convection in a cubical cavity at high Rayleigh numbers. International Journal
     of Heat and Mass Transfer, 113:217–228, 2017.

[66] Y. S. Tian and T.G. Karayiannis. Low turbulence natural convection in an air filled
     square cavity: part i: the thermal and fluid flow fields. International Journal of Heat
     and Mass Transfer, 43(6):849–866, 2000.

[67] S Mergui, F Penot, and JL Tuhault. Experimental natural convection in an air-filled
     square cavity at Ra= 1.7×109 . RAWM Henkes & CJ Hogendoorn (eds.), pages 97–108,
     1993.

[68] RJ Krane. Some detailed field measurements for a natural convection flow in a vertical
     square enclosure. In Proceedings of the First ASME-JSME Thermal Engineering Joint
     Conference, 1983, volume 1, pages 323–329, 1983.



                                             64
[69] SM Bilski, John R Lloyd, and KT Yang. An experimental investigation of the laminar
     natural convection velocity field in square and partitioned enclosures. In International
     Heat Transfer Conference Digital Library. Begel House Inc., 1986.

[70] Patrick Le Quéré and Masud Behnia. From onset of unsteadiness to chaos in a differ-
     entially heated square cavity. Journal of fluid mechanics, 359:81–107, 1998.

[71] DG Briggs and DN Jones. Two-dimensional periodic natural convection in a rect-
     angular enclosure of aspect ratio one. ASME Journal of Heat Transfer, 107:850–4,
     1985.

[72] E Tric, G Labrosse, and M Betrouni. A first incursion into the 3d structure of nat-
     ural convection of air in a differentially heated cubic cavity, from accurate numerical
     solutions. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 43(21):4043–4056, 2000.

[73] Ao Xu, Le Shi, and Heng-Dong Xi. Lattice Boltzmann simulations of three-dimensional
     thermal convective flows at high Rayleigh number. International Journal of Heat and
     Mass Transfer, 140:359–370, 2019.




                                             65
