Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                J. Fluid Mech. (2017), vol. 814, pp. 165–184.   c Cambridge University Press 2017                165
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                doi:10.1017/jfm.2017.19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Statistics of kinetic and thermal energy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dissipation rates in two-dimensional turbulent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rayleigh–Bénard convection

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Yang Zhang1 , Quan Zhou1, † and Chao Sun2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 Shanghai Institute of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mechanics in Energy Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200072, China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2 Center for Combustion Energy and Department of Thermal Engineering,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tsinghua University, 100084 Beijing, China

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (Received 7 September 2016; revised 3 December 2016; accepted 16 December 2016;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               first published online 3 February 2017)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                We investigate the statistical properties of the kinetic εu and thermal εθ energy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dissipation rates in two-dimensional (2-D) turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard (RB) convection.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Direct numerical simulations were carried out in a box with unit aspect ratio in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rayleigh number range 106 ⩽ Ra ⩽ 1010 for Prandtl numbers Pr = 0.7 and 5.3. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                probability density functions (PDFs) of both dissipation rates are found to deviate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                significantly from a log-normal distribution. The PDF tails can be well described by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a stretched exponential function, and become broader for higher Rayleigh number and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                lower Prandtl number, indicating an increasing degree of small-scale intermittency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                with increasing Reynolds number. Our results show that the ensemble averages
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hεu iV,t and hεθ iV,t scale as Ra−0.18∼−0.20 , which is in excellent agreement with the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                scaling estimated from the two global exact relations for the dissipation rates. By
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                separating the bulk and boundary-layer contributions to the total dissipations, our
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                results further reveal that hεu iV,t and hεθ iV,t are both dominated by the boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                layers, corresponding to regimes Il and Iu in the Grossmann–Lohse (GL) theory
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (J. Fluid Mech., vol. 407, 2000, pp. 27–56). To include the effects of thermal plumes,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the plume–background partition is also considered and hεθ iV,t is found to be plume
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dominated. Moreover, the boundary-layer/plume contributions scale as those predicted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                by the GL theory, while the deviations from the GL predictions are observed for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bulk/background contributions. The possible reasons for the deviations are discussed.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Key words: Bénard convection, convection, turbulent flows




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1. Introduction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard (RB) convection, which describes the convective motion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of a fluid layer between two horizontal parallel plates heated from below and cooled
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                from above, is a typical model system abstracted from many natural phenomena
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and industrial processes (Ahlers, Grossmann & Lohse 2009; Lohse & Xia 2010;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Chillà & Schumacher 2012; Sun & Zhou 2014). A better knowledge of this system
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                not only points out a convenient way of understanding complicated convection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                problems occurring in nature but also gives fundamental and perspective insight into
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      † Email address for correspondence: qzhou@shu.edu.cn
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                166                           Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                some features of turbulence (Kadanoff 2001). One of the key issues that has been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                comprehensively investigated is to physically understand the functional form of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                global heat transport, measured by the Nusselt number, defined as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Nu =           ,                               (1.1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               χ ∆/H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                as a function of the two control parameters of the system: the Rayleigh number Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and the Prandtl number Pr, defined as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   βg1H 3               ν
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ra =            and Pr = .                        (1.2a,b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     νκ                 κ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Here, Q is the heat current density across the fluid layer of height H for an imposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                temperature difference ∆, g is the acceleration due to gravity and χ, β, ν and κ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                are the thermal conductivity, thermal expansion coefficient, kinematic viscosity and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                thermal diffusivity of the convecting fluid, respectively. The quantities that play an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                important role in the heat-transport processes are the kinetic and thermal energy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dissipation rates, which are respectively given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 X ∂uj (x, t) ∂ui (x, t) 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       εu (x, t) = ν               +                              (1.3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2 ij       ∂xi        ∂xj

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X  ∂θ (x, t) 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              εθ (x, t) = κ                      .                   (1.4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ∂xi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                These two quantities denote direct dissipation of kinetic and thermal energy due to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the effects of the fluid viscosity and thermal diffusivity, and can be quantified by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                magnitudes of the gradients of the turbulent velocity and temperature fields, u(x, t)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and θ (x, t). As turbulent RB convection is a typical example for turbulent flows in a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                closed system, its local dissipation rates can be directly connected to the global heat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                transport through the convection cell via the two exact relations:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ν3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hεu iV,t =      (Nu − 1)RaPr−2                         (1.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∆2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hεθ iV,t = κ Nu,                                 (1.6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                where h·iV,t denotes an ensemble (or space–time) average. These relations form the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                backbone of the popular Grossmann–Lohse (GL) theory of turbulent heat transfer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (Grossmann & Lohse 2000, 2004).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Due to the difficulty in the measurements of velocity or temperature gradients, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                experimental studies on the dissipation rates are rather limited in the field of turbulent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RB convection. The first attempt on this subject was carried out by He, Tong & Xia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (2007) and He & Tong (2009), who used four identical thermistors to simultaneously
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                measure the three components of the local temperature gradient. The time-averaged
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                thermal energy dissipation rate was then decomposed into two contributions: one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                comes from the mean temperature gradient that concentrates in the thermal boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                layers (BL) and the other generated by thermal plumes that dominates in the bulk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                region. Using the same data set, He, Tong & Ching (2010), He, Ching & Tong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (2011) further constructed a locally averaged thermal dissipation rate over a time
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection     167
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                interval τ , which was found to exhibit good scaling in τ with exponents being in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                excellent agreement with those predicted by a phenomenological intermittency model.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                By measuring the second-order velocity structure functions in the dissipative range,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the time-averaged kinetic energy dissipation rate was indirectly obtained at the cell
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                centre by Ni, Huang & Xia (2011). The Ra dependence of the measured results
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                was found to agree with the predictions of the GL model and it was shown that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                local kinetic energy dissipation rate balances local heat flux in the central region of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                turbulent thermal convection.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Compared with the difficulty in experiments, the direct numerical simulations (DNS)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                data enable the calculation of dissipation rates. The pioneering work on this subject
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                was performed by Verzicco & Camussi (2003) and Verzicco (2003), who analysed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the statistical properties of εu and εθ in a cylindrical cell of aspect ratio one half.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Later, Shishkina & Wagner (2006, 2008) investigated the formation and development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of thermal plumes and their interaction via evaluating the thermal dissipation rates.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Emran & Schumacher (2008) examined the probability density functions (PDF) of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                thermal dissipation rates in a cylindrical cell. They found that, similarly to passive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                scalar mixing, the PDFs deviate significantly from a log-normal distribution and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the PDF tails can be well fitted by a stretched exponential function. Furthermore,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kaczorowski & Wagner (2009) used the PDFs of εθ to distinguish the three different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                physical regions in a long rectangular cell via the two inflection points of the PDFs.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ng et al. (2015) calculated in vertical natural convection the dissipation contributions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                that come from respectively the BL and bulk regions, and their results revealed that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the contributions scale as those predicted by the GL theory. Recently, Petschel et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (2013, 2015) put forward the idea of dissipation layers, which are based on the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                systematic measurements of the dissipation rates and were found to share central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                characteristics with classical BLs. In addition, such dissipation layers can be extended
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                naturally to arbitrary boundary conditions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   In the paper, we provide a detailed statistical analysis of the kinetic and thermal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                energy dissipation rates in two-dimensional (2-D) turbulent RB convection by means
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of the DNS data for 106 ⩽ Ra ⩽ 1010 and for Pr = 0.7 and 5.3. Two considerations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                prompted us to restrict ourselves to the 2-D geometry: (i) the numerical effort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                required for 2-D simulations is much smaller so that a good resolution of the BLs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                as well as of the dissipation events at high Rayleigh/Reynolds numbers is guaranteed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and systematic studies can be performed; (ii) many well-cited theories for turbulent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RB systems are essentially two-dimensional, e.g. the popular GL theory (Grossmann
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                & Lohse 2000) and the recent Whitehead–Doering theory for the ultimate regime
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (Whitehead & Doering 2011).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In § 2, we give a brief
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                description of the governing equations and numerical model. The numerical results
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                are presented and analysed in § 3, which is divided into four parts. Section 3.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                describes the global features of the simulations. Section 3.2 studies PDFs of εu and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                εθ . In § 3.3, we compare the dissipation contributions coming from the bulk with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                those coming from the BL regions. The Ra and Re dependences of hεu i and hεθ i are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                presented and discussed in § 3.4. Finally, we summarize our findings in § 4.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2. Numerical methods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The mathematical model and the numerical scheme have been described in detail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                elsewhere (Huang & Zhou 2013; Zhou 2013; Qiu, Liu & Zhou 2014; Zhou et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2016) and thus we give only their main features here. The computational domain
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                168                          Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                consists of a 2-D box with uniform grids and of unit aspect ratio (i.e. ratio of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                horizontal length L to the cell height H, Γ = L/H = 1). While the two vertical side
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                walls are chosen to be adiabatic, cold and hot fixed temperatures, θ = −0.5 and 0.5,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                are applied to the top and bottom plates, respectively. All the solid surfaces satisfy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the no-penetration and no-slip velocity boundary conditions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The flow is solved by the numerical integration of the 2-D time-dependent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Navier–Stokes equations in vorticity–streamfunction formulation under the Boussinesq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                approximation. The numerical scheme is a compact fourth-order central finite-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                difference method (Liu, Wang & Johnston 2003). The equations are given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∂ω                         ∂θ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  + (u · ∇)ω = ν∇ 2 ω + ,                           (2.1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ∂t                         ∂x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ∇ 2 ψ = ω,                                 (2.2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ∂ψ          ∂ψ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  u=−        , w=       ,                       (2.3a,b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ∂z          ∂x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ∂θ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     + (u · ∇)θ = κ∇ 2 θ ,                          (2.4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ∂t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                where u and w are, respectively, the horizontal and vertical components of the velocity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                field, ψ is the streamfunction and ω = ∂w/∂x − ∂u/∂z is the vorticity field. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                equations have been made non-dimensional√by using the cell height H, the temperature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               √ the free-fall velocity U = βg1H,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                difference ∆ and                                     √ and hence the corresponding fluid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                viscosity ν = Pr/Ra and thermal diffusivity κ = 1/PrRa. In our present study, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rayleigh number was varied from 106 to 1010 , while the Prandtl number was fixed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                at Pr = 0.7 and 5.3, respectively corresponding to the working fluids of air (du Puits,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Resagk & Thess 2007) and water at 31◦ (Zhou et al. 2012). In table 1, we list the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                flow and grid parameters of the simulations.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We briefly comment on the spatial and temporal resolutions. For the numerical study
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of turbulent RB convection, the mesh size must be set to achieve a full resolution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of the BLs (Shishkina et al. 2010), as well as to resolve the smallest scales of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                flow, these being the dissipative scales, i.e. the Kolmogorov scale η and the Batchelor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                scale ηB . In the present study, the number of grid points was generally chosen to be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the same for the two different Pr, except for the highest Rayleigh number Ra = 1010 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and was increased from 129 × 129 to 3073 × 3073 for Ra increasing from 106 to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1010 . In table 1, we list the number of grids NBL within the thermal BL and the grid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                spacing ∆g is compared with η and ηB for each simulation. It is seen that for all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of our simulations the thermal BL is resolved with at least 10 grid points and the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                grid spacing ∆g . 0.57η and ∆g . 0.48ηB . Furthermore, the uniform grids adopted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in the present study ensure the spatial resolution at the side walls to be the same as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                that close to the top and bottom plates. The viscous BLs near both the plates and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                side walls are resolved with at least 8 grid points at lower Pr and with at least 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                grid points at higher Pr, due to the increasing viscous BL thickness with increasing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pr. To check whether the present temporal resolution resolves the smallest time scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in turbulence, we also compare the simulation time interval ∆t with the Kolmogorov
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                time scale τη in table 1. One sees that ∆t /τη < 0.01 for all runs, thus guaranteeing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the adequate temporal resolution. We note that the present spatial resolutions also obey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the criterion proposed by Grötzbach (1983) and the time step ∆t is chosen to fulfil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy (CFL) conditions, i.e. the CFL number is 0.3 or less for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                all computations presented in this paper.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Another way to verify the grid resolution is to test whether the two global exact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                relations (1.5) and (1.6) hold for the simulations, as suggested by Stevens, Verzicco
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection          169

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hεu iV,t    hεθ iV,t        ∆g ∆g      ∆t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pr       Ra         Nx × Nz       Nu    Re               √        √      NBL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Nu − 1)/ RaPr Nu/ RaPr          η    ηB    τη
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7    1 × 106     129 × 129      6.30   279        1.0041      1.0023   11    0.45 0.37 0.0069
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7    3 × 106     193 × 193      7.64   492        1.0038      1.0018   13    0.42 0.35 0.0062
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7    1 × 107     257 × 257     11.37   968        1.0031      1.0014   12    0.47 0.39 0.0058
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7    3 × 107     385 × 385     16.50 1800         1.0025      1.0006   12    0.46 0.38 0.0071
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7    1 × 108     513 × 513     25.25 3662         1.0021      0.9998   11    0.52 0.43 0.0088
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7    3 × 108     769 × 769     35.73 6897         1.0017      1.0006   11    0.50 0.42 0.0070
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7    1 × 109    1025 × 1025    53.51 15101        0.9967      0.9996   10    0.56 0.47 0.0069
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7    3 × 109    1537 × 1537    66.95 28418        0.9896      1.0013   12    0.52 0.43 0.0029
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.7    1 × 1010   2049 × 2049    93.88 61797        1.0358      0.9996   12    0.57 0.48 0.0023
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3    1 × 106     129 × 129      6.87    38        1.0026      1.0019   10    0.17 0.38 0.0042
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3    3 × 106     193 × 193      9.33    70        1.0022      1.0009   11    0.16 0.37 0.0038
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3    1 × 107     257 × 257     13.28   156        1.0017      1.0008   10    0.18 0.41 0.0023
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3    3 × 107     385 × 385     18.86   296        1.0010      1.0009   11    0.17 0.40 0.0037
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3    1 × 108     513 × 513     26.21   596        1.0000      1.0002   10    0.19 0.44 0.0033
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3    3 × 108     769 × 769     35.96 1145         1.0016      1.0001   11    0.18 0.42 0.0026
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3    1 × 109    1025 × 1025    51.28 2269         1.0030      1.0005   11    0.20 0.46 0.0031
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3    3 × 109    1537 × 1537    71.57 4330         0.9996      1.0019   11    0.19 0.44 0.0022
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3    1 × 1010   3073 × 3073   103.0   9916        0.9963      1.0003   15    0.16 0.33 0.0013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TABLE 1. Simulation parameters. The columns from left to right indicate the following:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pr, Ra, the p     resolution in horizontal and vertical directions Nx × Nz , Nu, Re = Urms H/ν
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                with Urms = h(u2 + w2 )iV,t , hεu iV,t compared with that obtained from the exact relation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hεu i = ν 3 /H 4 (Nu − 1)RaPr−2 = (Nu − 1)/ RaPr,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                √     hεθ iV,t compared with that obtained from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the exact relation hεθ i = κ∆2 /H 2 Nu = Nu/ RaPr, the number of grid points within the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                thermal BL NBL , the grid spacing ∆g compared with the Kolmogorov scale estimated by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the global criterion η = HPr1/2 /[Ra(Nu − 1)]1/4 , ∆g compared with the Batchelor scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ηB = ηPr−1/2 (Silano, Sreenivasan√& Verzicco    √ 2010), the time interval ∆t compared with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the Kolmogorov time scale τη = ν/hεu i = Pr/(Nu − 1).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                & Lohse (2010). The sixth and seventh columns of table 1 compare the directly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                calculated dissipation rates with those obtained from Ra, Pr and Nu via the exact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                relations. One sees that for most of the cases the difference is less than 1 %. This
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                guarantees the adequate resolution for small-scale turbulent structures, like thermal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                plumes, even in the regions very close to the horizontal plates and close to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vertical side walls.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3. Results and discussion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.1. Global features
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                In figures 1(a,b), we show typical examples of the instantaneous velocity fields
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (arrows), overlapped with the corresponding temperature fields (colour), obtained
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                from the simulations with Ra = 1010 and with Pr = 0.7 and 5.3, respectively. As
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                shown in figure 1(b), the overall flow pattern consists of a large counter-clockwise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (or clockwise in some cases) rotatory motion in the bulk and several smaller secondary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rolls at the four corners. This flow pattern is the same as those observed in previous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                studies (Sugiyama et al. 2009, 2010; Zhou et al. 2011; Chandra & Verma 2013) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is found to be stable for most of the time and for most of the runs, except for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                simulation with Ra = 1010 and Pr = 0.7, where the corner-flow rolls are always not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                stable and would detach from the corners (see figure 1a).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                170                              Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (a) 1.0                                      0.5    (b) 1.0                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.4                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.3                                                  0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8                                     0.2         0.8                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6                                     0           0.6                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             –0.1                                                 –0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 z                                           –0.2                                                 –0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4                                     –0.3        0.4                                      –0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             –0.4                                                 –0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             –0.5                                                 –0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2                                                 0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0    0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0                 0    0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (c) 1.0                                      –2.2   (d) 1.0                                       –2.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             –2.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6                                                 0.6                                      –3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4                                     –3.0        0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  –3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2                                                 0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0    0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0                 0    0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (e) 1.0                                      –2.2   ( f ) 1.0                                     –2.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8                                     –2.6        0.8                                      –3.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6                                     –3.0        0.6                                      –3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             –3.4                                                 –4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4                                                 0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             –3.8                                                 –4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2                                                 0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0    0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0                 0    0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       x                                                    x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 1. (a,b) Typical snapshots of the instantaneous temperature (colour) and velocity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (arrows) fields for Ra = 1010 and for Pr = 0.7 (a) and 5.3 (b). (c–f ) The corresponding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                logarithmic fields of kinetic log10 εu (x, z) (c,d) and thermal log10 εθ (x, z) (e,f ) energy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dissipation rates for Pr = 0.7 (c,e) and 5.3 (d,f ).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 1(c–f ) respectively displays the corresponding logarithmic fields of kinetic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                log10 εu and thermal log10 εθ dissipation rates, where the local dissipation rate is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                indicated according to the colour bar. It is seen that the intense dissipations of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                both εu and εθ occur nearly in the regions with higher or lower temperature, which
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                correspond to hot or cold plumes detaching from the thermal BLs. This suggests that
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection                        171
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a)                              0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b)                              0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            106
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        102                                                 105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              106   108     1010                                  106   108     1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nu                                                  Re 104
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ra                                                  Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            103

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        101                                                 102

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              106     107          108   109   1010               106     107          108    109   1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ra                                                  Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 2. (Colour online) Log–log plots of Nu (a) and Re (b) as functions of Ra for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pr = 0.7 (circles) and 5.3 (triangles). The dashed lines are the best power-law fits to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the corresponding data. The insets show the compensated plots NuRa−0.3 versus Ra and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ReRa−0.6 versus Ra.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the rising and falling thermal plumes are associated with large amplitudes of both
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                kinetic and thermal dissipation rates (Kerr 1996; Shishkina & Wagner 2007; Emran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                & Schumacher 2008). This also suggests a strong positive correlation between the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                two dissipation fields. Indeed, our calculation shows that the correlation coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                between εu and εθ is larger than 0.4 for all the simulations, similar to the findings in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2-D Rayleigh–Taylor turbulence by Zhou & Jiang (2016).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  We now come to the scaling relations of the Nusselt number Nu and the Reynolds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                number Re versus the Rayleigh number Ra. In the present study, Nu was calculated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                over the whole cell and over time via the definition (Verzicco & Camussi 2003;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Verzicco & Sreenivasan 2008)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nu = 1 + PrRahwθiV,t .                              (3.1)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Due to the zero value for the velocity average over the whole cell, we here choose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the root-mean-square (r.m.s.) velocity to define the Reynolds number (Sugiyama et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009), i.e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Urms H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Re =         ,                                 (3.2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ν
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                where Urms = h(u2 + w2 )iV,t can be used as a global measure for the strength of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                convection. The convergence of both Nu and Re has been checked by comparing the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                time averages over the first and the last halves of each simulation, and the resulting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                relative error was smaller than 1 % for all of our simulations.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 2(a) shows a log–log plot of the measured Nu as a function of Ra for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                two Prandtl numbers Pr = 0.7 (circles) and 5.3 (triangles). The data can be well
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                described by a power-law relation and the best fit gives Nu = 0.099Ra−0.30±0.02 , shown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                as the dashed line in the figure. We note that the present scaling agrees well with the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                previous numerical results found also in 2-D convection cells (Johnston & Doering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009; van der Poel, Stevens, Sugiyama & Lohse 2012). We further note that the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                exponent 0.30 ± 0.02 is in general consistent with those obtained in 3-D cylindrical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RB systems (Ahlers et al. 2009; Chillà & Schumacher 2012). This suggests that the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                heat transport in both 2-D and 3-D convection might be dominated by the same
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                physical mechanism, and thus they could be modelled in a similar way. Indeed, as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                we shall see in § 3.3, the results obtained in the present 2-D settings obey the GL
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                172                           Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                phase diagram obtained for 3-D convection. Nevertheless, the prefactor 0.099 in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                best fit relation is smaller than its counterpart for the 3-D cases where it varies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                between 0.12 and 0.15 (see, e.g. figure 2 of Wagner, Shishkina & Wagner (2012)).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The possible reason is that in a closed system the convective flow would sometimes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                make hot (cold) plumes move downwards (upwards) and thus lead to strong count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                gradient/negative local heat flux (Huang & Zhou 2013), which impedes the overall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                heat transfer. This happens much more in two dimensions than in three dimensions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 2(b) displays the measured Re as a function of Ra in a log–log plot. Due
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to the decreasing viscosity ν, the Reynolds number for Pr = 0.7 is found to be much
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                larger than that for Pr = 5.3. The best power-law fit to the data yields Re ∼ Ra0.59±0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                for Pr = 0.7 and Re ∼ Ra0.60±0.01 for Pr = 5.3. The fitted scaling exponents are in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                excellent agreement with the exponent 0.62 found for 2-D Boussinesq RB convection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                by Sugiyama et al. (2009), but are notably larger than those varying from 0.42 to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5 seen for 3-D RB flows in various convecting fluids with wide parameter range
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and based on the single- or multi-point measurements. (Ashkenazi & Steinberg 1999;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Niemela et al. 2001; Qiu & Tong 2001; Lam et al. 2002; Sun & Xia 2005; Brown,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Funfschilling & Ahlers 2007). The difference in Re scaling is not captured by the GL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                model and implies that the convective flow in two dimensions has a stronger strength
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                than in three dimensions. Indeed, direct comparison between 2-D and 3-D convection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                revealed a higher absolute value of the Reynolds number in two dimensions (van der
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Poel, Stevens & Lohse 2013). The possible reason is that in the 2-D geometry almost
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                all plumes emitted from the top and bottom thermal BLs follow the motion of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                large-scale convective rolls (including the corner-flow rolls), and then drive these large-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                scale rolls, due to the absence of the fluid motion in the third dimension, whereas this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is not the case for three dimensions (van der Poel et al. 2013).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.2. Probability density functions (PDFs) of εu and εθ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Next, we investigate the statistics of the kinetic εu and thermal εθ energy dissipation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rates in this section. Figures 3(a,b) show the PDFs of εu obtained at Pr = 0.7 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.3, respectively. The corresponding PDFs of εθ are shown in figures 4(a,b). All
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                data havepbeen normalized withp respect to their root-mean-square (r.m.s.) values
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (εu )rms = hεu2 iV,t and (εθ )rms = hεθ2 iV,t . In the figures, two features are worthy of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                note. First, for both εu and εθ , the PDF tails become more extended with increasing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ra (and thus with increasing Re), implying an increasing degree of small-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                intermittency possessed by the both dissipation fields. This is in spite of the fact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                that the intermittency effects are expected to be absent for the velocity field in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2-D turbulent convection, as shown by Celani et al. (2002). It should be noted that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the convective flow studied by Celani et al. (2002) is forced by a mean gradient,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                which has different boundary conditions from the present RB setting. Whether the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                intermittency in the statistics of velocity fluctuations is absent also in the present
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                system needs to be verified, which requires a detailed study on the high-order
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                moments of velocity increments. Second, at a given Rayleigh number, the PDFs of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                both εu and εθ obtained at lower Prandtl number (Pr = 0.7) have a fatter tail than
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                those obtained at higher Prandtl number (Pr = 5.3). The reason for this might be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                attributed to the increasing Re (and thus an increasing degree of intermittency) with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                decreasing Pr, as shown in figure 2(b). This is in line with the observations in 3-D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                cylindrical RB systems (He et al. 2007; Emran & Schumacher 2008), but is different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                from the results observed by Schumacher & Sreenivasan (2005) for the passive scalar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                case, where the decreasing diffusivity with increasing Pr causes sharper gradients of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the scalar field and hence generates fatter PDF tails.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection                    173
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (a)   101                                             (b) 101

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–1                                               10–1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–3                                               10–3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PDF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–5                                               10–5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–7                                               10–7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–9                                               10–9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0        100           200         300             0        50           100       150


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (c)   100                                             (d) 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–1                                               10–1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–2                                               10–2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PDF 10–3                                                  10–3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–4                                               10–4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–5                                               10–5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Log-normal                                        Log-normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–6                                               10–6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           –6     –4     –2      0          2    4            –6     –4    −2      0         2   4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 3. (Colour online) (a,b) PDFs of the kinetic energy dissipation rates, εu , obtained
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                over the whole cell and normalized with respect to their r.m.s. values (εu )rms . The solid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                lines are the best fits of stretched exponentials, as given by (3.3), to the corresponding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tails. (c,d) PDFs of log10 εu calculated over the whole cell. Here, µ and σ are, respectively,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the mean value and standard deviation of log10 εu . The dashed lines mark the log-normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                distribution for comparison. The data are obtained at Pr = 0.7 (a,c) and 5.3 (b,d).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   To quantitatively describe the shape of the measured PDF tails, we note that a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                stretched exponential function, i.e.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           p(Y) = √ exp(−mY α ),                                 (3.3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                was derived analytically for the tails of passive scalar dissipation in the limit of large
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Peclet and Prandtl numbers in two dimensions and α = 1/3 was found (Chertkov,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Falkovich & Kolokolov 1998). This result was then extended to arbitrary space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dimensions (Gamba & Kolokolov 1999), as the behaviour (3.3) is determined by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dynamics of stretching (not of rotation) that is likely to take place in any dimension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (Chertkov et al. 1998). Here, C, m and α are fitting parameters, and Y = X − Xmp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                with X = εθ /(εθ )rms and Xmp being the abscissa of the most probable (mp) amplitude.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                In numerical studies of passive scalar in turbulence, the function (3.3) was found to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                well fit to the fraction of the dissipation PDF that extends from the mp amplitude to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the end of the tail (Overholt & Pope 1996; Schumacher & Sreenivasan 2005). The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                similar analysis was later conducted for active scalar in 3-D RB convection (Emran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                & Schumacher 2008; Kaczorowski & Wagner 2009) and in 2-D Rayleigh–Taylor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                turbulence (Zhou & Jiang 2016). Here, to follow this idea, we also adopted (3.3) to
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                174                                        Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (a)   101                                                     (b) 101

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–1                                                       10–1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–3                                                       10–3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PDF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–5                                                       10–5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–7                                                       10–7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–9                                                       10–9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0        50        100       150       200                 0        30        60       90       120


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (c)   100                                                     (d) 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–1                                                       10–1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–2                                                       10–2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PDF 10–3                                                          10–3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–4                                                       10–4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–5                                                       10–5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Log-normal                                                Log-normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10–6                                                       10–6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  –4        –2         0         2         4                 –4        −2        0        2         4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 4. (Colour online) (a,b) PDFs of the thermal energy dissipation rates, εθ , obtained
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                over the whole cell and normalized with respect to their r.m.s. values (εθ )rms . The solid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                lines are the best fits of stretched exponentials, as given by (3.3), to the corresponding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tails. (c,d) PDFs of log10 εθ calculated over the whole cell. Here, µ and σ are, respectively,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the mean value and standard deviation of log10 εθ . The dashed lines mark the log-normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                distribution for comparison. The data are obtained at Pr = 0.7 (a,c) and 5.3 (b,d).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fit the PDF tails for both εu and εθ obtained over the whole cell, and our results
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                show that (3.3) can be indeed used to describe well the tails of the dissipation PDFs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (see the solid lines in figures 3 and 4).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   In some classical turbulence theories, like the refined similarity hypothesis proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                by Kolmogorov (1962), the dissipation fields are often assumed to have a log-normal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                distribution. However, the highly intermittent nature of the local dissipation generates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the observed deviations from the log-normality (Ferchichi & Tavoularis 2002;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Schumacher & Sreenivasan 2005; Emran & Schumacher 2008; Kaczorowski &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Wagner 2009). To check the deviations in our present systems, the dissipation PDFs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                are represented in log-normal coordinates in figures 3(c,d) and 4(c,d). In the figures,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the dashed lines mark the log-normal distribution for reference. Clear departures from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                log-normality can be seen for both εu and εθ . As Ra increases, the cores of the PDFs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                seem to converge towards the log-normality and the right tails become fatter, while
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the left tails do not appear to show systematic trends with the Rayleigh number.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.3. Spatial distribution of εu and εθ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 5(a–d) show the vertical profiles of hεu ix,t and hεθ ix,t , which illustrate the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                spatial distribution of the dissipation rates. Here, h·ix,t denotes an average over the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                horizontal direction and over time. The kinetic energy dissipation rate keeps nearly
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection                                 175

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (a) 1.0                                                (b) 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.02                                                           0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6   z 0.01                                           0.6       z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  z                                                                          0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4                                                    0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2        0       0.04    0.08     0.12               0.2               0      0.005    0.010   0.015


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0          0.02          0.04          0.06             0                      0.01                 0.02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (c) 1.0                                                (d) 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.04                                                           0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6    z 0.02                                          0.6       z 0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4                                                    0.4             0.01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2        0       0.05    0.10     0.15               0.2               0    0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0          0.02          0.04          0.06             0                      0.01                 0.02



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 5. (Colour online) Averaged vertical profiles of kinetic (a,b) and thermal (c,d)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                energy dissipation rates obtained at Pr = 0.7 (a,c) and 5.3 (b,d). The insets show an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                enlarged portion of the profiles close to the bottom plate.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                constant in the bulk, increases rapidly in the neighbourhood of the top and bottom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                plates where viscosity becomes significant, and reaches its maximum value at the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                solid-fluid interfaces. With decreasing Ra, the magnitude of hεu ix,t enhances in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bulk, but drops in the BL, indicating that the kinetic energy is dissipated more
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                equally over the whole cell at lower Rayleigh numbers. The thermal dissipation rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                also attains its largest value near the plates. However, in the core region (0.4 . z . 0.6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hεθ ix,t has almost a zero value for all data, suggesting that most thermal energy is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dissipated within the thermal BLs.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   To further quantify the spatial distribution, we calculate the dissipation contributions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                coming from the bulk region, separated from those coming from the BLs, i.e.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  hεu iV,t = hεu iVBL ,t + hεu iVbulk ,t ,                                 (3.4)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  hεθ iV,t = hεθ iVBL ,t + hεθ iVbulk ,t ,                                 (3.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                where VBL and Vbulk denote the BL and bulk regions, respectively, and the averages
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                h·iVBL ,t and h·iVbulk ,t have been multiplied by their corresponding volume percentages.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Note that the splitting (3.4) and (3.5) are the central idea of the GL theory (Ahlers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                et al. 2009). To do this splitting, the BL thickness must be first defined to separate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the bulk and BL regions. There are quite a few definitions of BL thickness, based on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                either the mean velocity/temperature profiles or their r.m.s. profiles (Sun et al. 2005;
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                176                                     Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (a) 1.0                                              (b) 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.8                            Bulk         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Percentage


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6                                         0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4                                         0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2                                         0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      106   107   108    109     1010             106   107   108   109   1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ra                                          Ra

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 6. (Colour online) Percentages of bulk (triangles) and BL (circles) contributions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to the kinetic energy dissipation rates, εu , as functions of Ra at Pr = 0.7 (a) and 5.3 (b).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                du Puits, Resagk & Thess 2010; Zhou & Xia 2010, 2013; Scheel, Kim & White
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2012; Scheel & Schumacher 2014; Ng et al. 2015; Shishkina et al. 2015). In 2-D RB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                convection, however, due to the influences of the corner-flow rolls, the mean velocity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                profiles might sometimes lead to unphysical viscous BL thickness, as shown by Zhou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                et al. (2011). Therefore, in the present study, we define the viscous (thermal) BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                thickness, δurms (δθrms ), as the distance between the wall and the position at which the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r.m.s. velocity (temperature) is maximum. We find that this definition gives a thermal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BL thickness, δθrms , that is very close to the global estimation H/(2Nu). We further find
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                that whereas δurms increases with increasing Pr, δθrms at each Ra keeps nearly unchanged
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                for both Pr. The ratio between δurms and δθrms varies around 0.85 for Pr = 0.7, but
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                between 1.5 and 4 for Pr = 5.3. This is qualitatively consistent with the findings in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3-D cylindrical cells by Stevens, Lohse & Verzicco (2011).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   As no-slip velocity boundary conditions are applied to all the solid surfaces, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                velocity field has BLs close to both the two horizontal conducting plates and the two
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vertical side walls, whose thicknesses are determined from the horizontal and vertical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r.m.s. velocity profiles, respectively. On the other hand, due to the adiabatic side walls,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the thermal BLs include only those coming from the two horizontal plates. This BL–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bulk partition is consistent with the distinction proposed by the GL theory (see figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2 of Ahlers et al. 2009) and has been adopted in previous studies (Verzicco 2003;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Verzicco & Camussi 2003).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The relative contributions of the bulk and BL regions to the total hεu iV,t and hεθ iV,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                are plotted as functions of Ra in figures 6 and 7. It is seen that for our present
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                parameter ranges both εu and εθ are dominated by the BLs. Despite figures 5(a,b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                reveal that at lower Rayleigh numbers the kinetic energy is dissipated more equally
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                over the whole cell, the contribution to εu from the BL regions is still dominant as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the BL thicknesses (and thus the volume fraction occupied by the BLs) increases with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                decreasing Ra. According to these results, the present series of simulations at Pr = 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and 5.3 can be classified as Il and Iu regimes in the GL theory, respectively. Indeed,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                when placing the Ra and Pr values of the present simulations into the phase diagram
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of the GL theory (see figure 2 of Grossmann & Lohse 2000), we observe reasonable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                agreement. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the GL phase diagram (Grossmann
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                & Lohse 2000) is obtained for 3-D convection, while the present simulations are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                performed in two dimensions. Previous studies on the comparison between 2-D and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3-D RB convection (van der Poel et al. 2013) have revealed that the Nu–Ra scaling
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection              177

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (a) 1.0                                             (b) 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.8                           Bulk         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Percentage



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6                                        0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4                                        0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2                                        0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      106   107   108   109     1010             106   107   108   109   1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ra                                         Ra

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 7. (Colour online) Percentages of bulk (triangles) and BL (circles) contributions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to the thermal energy dissipation rates, εθ , as functions of Ra at Pr = 0.7 (a) and 5.3 (b).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                for 2-D and 3-D cases is very similar at higher Pr, differing only by a constant factor,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                while the difference is large at lower Pr, due to the strong roll state dependence of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Nu in 2-D convection.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   As the BL–bulk partition ignores the effects of thermal plumes which should be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                included in the BL estimates, Grossmann & Lohse (2004) suggested to use the labels
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pl (plume) and bg (background) for the two parts of the thermal energy dissipation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rates, i.e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hεθ iV,t = hεθ iVpl ,t + hεθ iVbg ,t .              (3.6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Here, hεθ iVpl ,t indicates the contributions from the plumes together with the BL and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hεθ iVbg ,t signals those from the background. This pl–bg partition has been adopted in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                some previous numerical studies to investigate the distribution of εθ in 3-D cylindrical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                cells (Shishkina & Wagner 2006; Emran & Schumacher 2012). Next, we also consider
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the pl–bg partition. To detect thermal plumes, we follow the approach of Huang et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (2013) and van der Poel, Verzicco, Grossmann & Lohse (2015). A thermal plume in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the bulk is defined as a region where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |θ (x, z, t) − hθix,t | > cθrms and   PrRa|w(x, z, t)θ (x, z, t)| > cNu. (3.7a,b)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Here, we consider the absolute value of the local convective heat flux, |w(x, z, t)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                θ(x, z, t)|, because thermal plumes may sometimes generate negative local heat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                transport, which happens much more in two dimensions than in three dimensions, as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                revealed by Huang & Zhou (2013). The empirical constant c is chosen to be 1.2,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                which is the same as that of van der Poel et al. (2015) but larger than the value of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.8 chosen by Huang et al. (2013). In a previous work in 3-D convection, Emran
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                & Schumacher (2012) identified thermal plumes by using a similar threshold that is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                based only on wθ and they found that the increase of the threshold by two orders
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of magnitude causes slight variations in the Ra scaling. In the present work, we also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                find that the Re scalings of hεθ iVpl ,t and hεθ iVbg ,t do not depend apparently on the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                value of threshold c. Figure 8(b) depicts the Vpl regions (in black) by applying the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                criterion (3.7a,b) to the instantaneous temperature snapshot shown in figure 8(a).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figures 9(a,b) shows the relative contributions from Vpl and Vbg to the total hεθ iV,t ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                as functions of Ra. Clearly, εθ is plume dominated for the present parameter ranges.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                When varying the value of threshold c, a systematic trend can be observed for both
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                178                                                Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a) 1.0                                                             0.5       (b) 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.8                                                   0.2              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6                                                   0                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      –0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   z                                                                  –0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4                                                   –0.3             0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      –0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      –0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2                                                                    0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0          0.2    0.4       0.6    0.8    1.0                          0       0.2     0.4       0.6         0.8      1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x                                                                    x

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 8. (a) A snapshot of the instantaneous temperature (colour) and velocity (arrows)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                fields for Ra = 1010 and Pr = 5.3. (b) The plume regions for the same snapshot are marked
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in black, otherwise white.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (a) 1.0                                                                   (b) 1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.8                                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          bg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4                                                              0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2                                                              0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      106         107        108    109        1010                      106     107      108           109          1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ra                                                           Ra

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F IGURE 9. Percentages of plume (triangles) and background (circles) contributions to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the thermal energy dissipation rates, εθ , as functions of Ra at Pr = 0.7 (a) and 5.3 (b).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                contributions. The smaller the threshold c, the more the Vpl contribution data are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                shifted upwards and those from Vbg downwards. Moreover, when the threshold c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                becomes large enough, the Vpl region will become negligibly small and then the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pl–bg partition will be the same as the BL–bulk partition.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3.4. Ra and Re dependence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Finally, we consider the Ra and Re dependence of the dissipation rates. Figure 10(a,b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                show the total dissipation rates, hεu iV,t and hεθ iV,t , as functions of Ra in log–log plots.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The solid lines in the figure represent the best power-law fits to the corresponding data,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                which yield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   hεu iV,t = 0.077Ra−0.18±0.02                     and    hεθ iV,t = 0.10Ra−0.19±0.02                 for Pr = 0.7,                (3.8a,b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −0.19±0.01                                           −0.20±0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  hεu iV,t = 0.036Ra                               and    hεθ iV,t = 0.050Ra                           for Pr = 5.3. (3.9a,b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                One sees that hεu iV,t and hεθ iV,t have similar scaling behaviours with Ra but their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                magnitudes vary with Pr.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection            179

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (a) 10–2                                            (b) 10–2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10–3                                                10–3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            106   107    108      109     1010                  106   107   108   109   1010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ra                                                 Ra

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 10. (Colour online) The Ra dependence of hεu iV,t (a) and hεθ iV,t (b) calculated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                at Pr = 0.7 (circles) and 5.3 (triangles). The solid lines represent the best power-law fits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to the corresponding data.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  To understand these scaling behaviours, we note that figure 2(a) has shown that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Nu ∼ Ra0.3 . Plug it into the two global exact relations (1.5) and (1.6), we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      √                                     √
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  hεu iV,t = (Nu − 1)/ RaPr ∼ Ra−0.2 and hεθ iV,t = Nu/ RaPr ∼ Ra−0.2 . (3.10a,b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Comparing (3.10a,b) to our measured scalings (3.8a,b) and (3.9a,b) in figure 10, one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                observes very good agreement within numerical uncertainty, again verifying that the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                global exact relations for hεu iV,t and hεθ iV,t are satisfied for our present simulations.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The essence of the GL theory (Grossmann & Lohse 2000) is the splitting of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the total dissipation rates into the contributions from the bulk and BL regions,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i.e. the relations (3.4) and (3.5). By assuming that there exist a large-scale mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                flow (associated with a Reynolds number Re) in the system and that the BLs are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                characterized by a single effective thickness, the four contributions to the dissipation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                can be estimated as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ν 3 5/2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     hεu iVBL ,t ∼     Re ,                             (3.11)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ν3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     hεu iVbulk ,t ∼ 4 Re3 ,                            (3.12)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ∆2 1/2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hεθ iVBL ,t ∼ κ 2 Re g(Pr),                             (3.13)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ∆2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   hεθ iVbulk ,t ∼ κ 2 PrRe,                            (3.14)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                where g(Pr) is a function of Pr. When the plume effects are included in the BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                estimates, we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ∆2 1/2 1/2 1/2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               hεθ iVpl ,t ∼ κ     Re Pr f ,                            (3.15)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ∆2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hεθ iVbg ,t ∼ κ 2 RePrf ,                           (3.16)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                where, f is a shedding frequency that has no systematic dependence on Reynolds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                number. To test these scalings, we examine the Re dependence of the normalized
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                180                                 Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1012


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1010


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 108


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 106


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 104
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   101        102     103           104         105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Re

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) 102                                              (c) 102




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      101                                                   101




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100                                                   100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        101      102       103          104     105           101         102         103   104   105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Re                                                         Re

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 11. (Colour online) (a,b) The Re dependence of the normalized dissipation in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                bulk and BL regions for hεu i/(ν 3 /H 4 ) (a) and hεθ i/[κ(∆/H)2 ] (b) obtained at Pr = 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and 5.3. For reference, the solid and dashed lines mark the GL predictions (3.11)–(3.14),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                respectively, for the BL and bulk contributions. (c) The Re dependence of the normalized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                thermal energy dissipation rates in the plume and background regions. For reference, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                solid and dashed lines mark the GL predictions (3.15)–(3.16), respectively, for the plume
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                and background contributions.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dissipations in figure 11. Figure 11(a,b) shows the results from the BL–bulk partition.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                It is seen that both the BL and bulk contributions exhibit parallel trends as Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                increases. This is consistent with the observations in figures 6 and 7, which show
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                that the ratio of the BL-to-bulk contributions for both hεu i and hεθ i appears to be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                constant. Figure 11(c) shows the results from the pl–bg partition for εθ . Similar to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the BL–bulk partition, the contributions from Vpl and Vbg also exhibit roughly parallel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                trends with increasing Re. We further find that these trends and their Re scaling do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                not change apparently with the value of threshold c.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   In addition, while the BL/plume contributions, hεu iVBL ,t , hεθ iVBL ,t , and hεθ iVpl ,t ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                follow well the GL predictions (3.11), (3.13), and (3.15) (the solid lines in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                figure 11), the bulk/background contributions, hεu iVbulk ,t , hεθ iVbulk ,t , and hεθ iVbg ,t deviate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                obviously from the predicted Re scalings (3.12), (3.14) and (3.16) (the dashed lines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in figure 11). Similar deviations for the bulk contributions have already been reported
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in homogeneous convection (Calzavarini et al. 2005), turbulent RB convection in
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection        181
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                spherical shells (Gastine, Wicht & Aurnou 2015) and vertical natural convection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (Ng et al. 2015). In the present study, the reason for the deviation of hεu iVbulk ,t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                from (3.12) is that the GL scaling (3.12) for the bulk contributions is based on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                the Kolmogorov’s picture in which the kinetic energy cascades from large to small
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                scales. This assumption, however, does not hold in 2-D RB convection, where an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                inverse cascade of kinetic energy from small to large scales is theoretically expected
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (Celani et al. 2002). Indeed, the calculation of the third-order structure function of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                longitudinal velocity increments, S3 (r) = h(w(r + z) − w(z))3 iV,t , shows that S3 (r) is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                positive over all scales studied (not shown here), signalling the reversal of the kinetic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                energy cascade in the present 2-D RB setting. A detailed study on this issue is out
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                of the scope of the present work.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4. Conclusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   In this paper, we present an analysis of the statistical properties of the kinetic and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection, by means of high-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                resolution DNS, with Pr fixed at 0.7 and 5.3 and Ra varying from 106 to 1010 . Major
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                findings are summarized as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (i) The global heat transport and momentum scaling exponents are examined, which
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      yields Nu ∼ Ra0.30±0.02 and Re ∼ Ra0.60±0.02 for both Pr. When comparing with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      previous numerical and experimental results obtained in the 3-D cases, Nu(Ra)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      is found to have a similar scaling exponent with smaller amplitudes, suggesting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      that the heat transport in both 2-D and 3-D convection might be dominated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      by the same physical mechanism and thus could be modelled in a similar way.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Whereas the exponent of Re(Ra) is notably larger than its 3-D counterpart,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      implying a stronger strength of the convective flow in two dimensions than in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      three dimensions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (ii) Similar to the 3-D situations, the PDFs of both εu and εθ in 2-D RB convection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      are found to be always non-log-normal, but their tails can be well fitted by a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      stretched exponential function. These tails become more extended with increasing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ra or decreasing Pr, which displays an increasing degree of small-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      intermittency with increasing Re. This is in spite of that intermittency is expected
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to be absent for velocity in 2-D turbulent convection (Celani et al. 2002). The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ensemble averages of both dissipation rates scale as Ra−0.18∼−0.20 . This scaling
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      exponent agrees well with those estimated from the two global exact relations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (1.5) and (1.6).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (iii) When considering the dissipation contributions that come from the bulk and BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      regions, we find that hεu iV,t and hεθ iV,t are both dominated by the BLs. This
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      corresponds to regimes Il and Iu in the GL theory (Grossmann & Lohse 2000) for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      our present simulations of Pr = 0.7 and 5.3 respectively. To include the effects of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      thermal plumes, the pl–bg partition is also considered and hεθ iV,t is found to be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      plume dominated. Further analysis reveals that the BL/pl contributions scale as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      those predicted by the GL theory, while the deviations from the GL predictions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      are observed for the bulk/bg contributions.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Acknowledgements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of China under grant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nos 11672156, 11572185, and 11332006, Shanghai Shuguang Project under grant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                no. 13SG40 and Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University under
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                182                               Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                grant no. NCET-13. Q.Z. wishes to acknowledge support given to him from the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                organization department of the CPC central committee through the National Program
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                for Support of Top-notch Young Professionals.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           REFERENCES

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A HLERS , G., G ROSSMANN , S. & L OHSE , D. 2009 Heat transfer and large scale dynamics in turbulent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rayleigh–Bénard convection. Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 503–537.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A SHKENAZI , S. & S TEINBERG , V. 1999 Spectra and statistics of velocity and temperature fluctuations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       in turbulent convection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4760.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B ROWN , E., F UNFSCHILLING , D. & A HLERS , G. 2007 Anomalous Reynolds-number scaling in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection. J. Stat. Mech. 10, P10005.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C ALZAVARINI , E., L OHSE , D., T OSCHI , F. & T RIPICCIONE , R. 2005 Rayleigh and Prandtl number
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       scaling in the bulk of Rayleigh–Bénard convection. Phys. Fluids 17, 055107.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C ELANI , A., M ATSUMOTO , T., M AZZINO , A. & V ERGASSOLA , M. 2002 Scaling and universality in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       turbulent convection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 054503.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C HANDRA , M. & V ERMA , M. K. 2013 Flow reversals in turbulent convection via vortex reconnections.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 114503.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C HERTKOV, M., FALKOVICH , G. & K OLOKOLOV, I. 1998 Intermittent dissipation of a passive scalar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       in turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2121–2124.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C HILLÀ , F. & S CHUMACHER , J. 2012 New perspectives in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Eur. Phys. J. E 35, 58.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E MRAN , M. S. & S CHUMACHER , J. 2008 Fine-scale statistics of temperature and its derivatives in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       convective turbulence. J. Fluid Mech. 611, 13–34.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E MRAN , M. S. & S CHUMACHER , J. 2012 Conditional statistics of thermal dissipation rate in turbulent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rayleigh–Bénard convection. Eur. Phys. J. E 35, 108.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F ERCHICHI , M. & TAVOULARIS , S. 2002 Scalar probability density function and fine structure in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       uniformly sheared turbulence. J. Fluid Mech. 461, 155–182.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G AMBA , A. & K OLOKOLOV, I. 1999 Dissipation statistics of a passive scalar in a multidimensional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       smooth flow. J. Stat. Phys. 94, 759–777.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G ASTINE , T., W ICHT, J. & AURNOU , J. M. 2015 Turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection in spherical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       shells. J. Fluid Mech. 778, 721–764.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G ROSSMANN , S. & L OHSE , D. 2000 Scaling in thermal convection: a unifying theory. J. Fluid Mech.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       407, 27–56.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G ROSSMANN , S. & L OHSE , D. 2004 Fluctuations in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection: the role
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of plumes. Phys. Fluids 16, 4462.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G RÖTZBACH , G. 1983 Spatial resolution requirements for direct numerical simulation of the Rayleigh–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bénard convection. J. Comput. Phys. 49, 241–269.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H E , X.-Z., C HING , E. S. C. & T ONG , P. 2011 Locally averaged thermal dissipation rate in turbulent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       thermal convection: a decomposition into contributions from different temperature gradient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       components. Phys. Fluids 23, 025106.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H E , X.-Z. & T ONG , P. 2009 Measurements of the thermal dissipation field in turbulent Rayleigh–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bénard convection. Phys. Rev. E 79, 026306.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H E , X.-Z., T ONG , P. & C HING , E. S. C. 2010 Statistics of the locally averaged thermal dissipation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rate in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection. J. Turbul. 11 (35), 1–10.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H E , X.-Z., T ONG , P. & X IA , K.-Q. 2007 Measured thermal dissipation field in turbulent Rayleigh–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bénard convection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 144501.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H UANG , S.-D., K ACZOROWSKI , M., N I , R. & X IA , K.-Q. 2013 Confinement-induced heat-transport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       enhancement in turbulent thermal convection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 104501.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H UANG , Y.-X. & Z HOU , Q. 2013 Counter-gradient heat transport in two-dimensional turbulent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rayleigh–Bénard convection. J. Fluid Mech. 737, R3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                J OHNSTON , H. & D OERING , C. R. 2009 Comparison of temperature thermal convection between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       conditions of constant temperature and constant flux. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 064501.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in 2-D turbulent RB convection                    183
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K ACZOROWSKI , M. & WAGNER , C. 2009 Analysis of the thermal plumes in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        convection based on well-resolved numerical simulations. J. Fluid Mech. 618, 89–112.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K ADANOFF , L. P. 2001 Turbulent heat flow: structures and scaling. Phys. Today 54 (8), 34–39.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K ERR , R. 1996 Rayleigh number scaling in numerical convection. J. Fluid Mech. 310, 139–179.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                K OLMOGOROV, A. N. 1962 A refinement of previous hypotheses concerning the local structure of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        turbulence in a viscous incompressible fluid at high Reynolds number. J. Fluid Mech. 13,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        82–85.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L AM , S., S HANG , X.-D., Z HOU , S.-Q. & X IA , K.-Q. 2002 Prandtl number dependence of the viscous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        boundary layer and the Reynolds numbers in Rayleigh–Bénard convection. Phys. Rev. E 65,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        066306.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L IU , J.-G., WANG , C. & J OHNSTON , H. 2003 A fourth order scheme for incompressible Boussinesq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        equations. J. Sci. Comput. 18, 253–285.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L OHSE , D. & X IA , K.-Q. 2010 Small-scale properties of turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection. Annu.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rev. Fluid Mech. 42, 335–364.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N G , C. S., O OI , A., L OHSE , D. & C HUNG , D. 2015 Vertical natural convection: application of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        unifying theory of thermal convection. J. Fluid Mech. 764, 349–361.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N I , R., H UANG , S.-D. & X IA , K.-Q. 2011 Local energy dissipation rate balances local heat flux in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the center of turbulent thermal convection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 174503.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N IEMELA , J. J., S KRBEK , L., S REENIVASAN , K. R. & D ONNELLY, R. J. 2001 The wind in confined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        thermal convection. J. Fluid Mech. 449, 169–178.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OVERHOLT, M. R. & P OPE , S. B. 1996 Direct numerical simulation of a passive scalar with imposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mean gradient in isotropic turbulence. Phys. Fluids 8, 3128–3148.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P ETSCHEL , K., S TELLMACH , S., W ILCZEK , M., L ÜLFF , J. & H ANSEN , U. 2013 Dissipation layers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in Rayleigh–Bénard convection: a unifying view. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 114502.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P ETSCHEL , K., S TELLMACH , S., W ILCZEK , M., L ÜLFF , J. & H ANSEN , U. 2015 Kinetic energy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        transport in Rayleigh–Bénard convection. J. Fluid Mech. 773, 395–417.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VAN DER P OEL , E. P., S TEVENS , R. J. A. M. & L OHSE , D. 2013 Comparison between two- and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        three-dimensional Rayleigh–Bénard convection. J. Fluid Mech. 736, 177–194.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VAN DER P OEL , E. P., S TEVENS , R. J. A. M., S UGIYAMA , K. & L OHSE , D. 2012 Flow states
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in two-dimensional Rayleigh–Bénard convection as a function of aspect-ratio and Rayleigh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        number. Phys. Fluids 24, 085104.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VAN DER P OEL , E. P., V ERZICCO , R., G ROSSMANN , S. & L OHSE , D. 2015 Plume emission statistics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection. J. Fluid Mech. 772, 5–15.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DU P UITS , R., R ESAGK , C. & T HESS , A. 2007 Mean velocity profile in confined turbulent convection.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 234504.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DU P UITS , R., R ESAGK , C. & T HESS , A. 2010 Measurements of the instantaneous local heat flux
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection. New J. Phys. 12, 075023.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Q IU , X., L IU , Y.-L. & Z HOU , Q. 2014 Local dissipation scales in two-dimensional Rayleigh–Taylor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        turbulence. Phys. Rev. E 90, 043012.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Q IU , X.-L. & T ONG , P. 2001 Large-scale velocity structures in turbulent thermal convection. Phys.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rev. Lett. 64, 036304.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S CHEEL , J. D., K IM , E. & W HITE , K. R. 2012 Thermal and viscous boundary layers in turbulent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rayleigh–Bénard convection. J. Fluid Mech. 711, 281–305.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S CHEEL , J. D. & S CHUMACHER , J. 2014 Local boundary layer scales in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        convection. J. Fluid Mech. 758, 344–373.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S CHUMACHER , J. & S REENIVASAN , K. R. 2005 Statistics and geometry of passive scalars in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        turbulence. Phys. Fluids 17, 125107.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S HISHKINA , O., H ORN , S., WAGNER , S. & C HING , E. S. C. 2015 Thermal boundary layer equation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        for turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 114302.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S HISHKINA , O., S TEVENS , R. J. A. M., G ROSSMANN , S. & L OHSE , D. 2010 Boundary layer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        structure in turbulent thermal convection and its consequences for the required numerical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        resolution. New J. Phys. 12, 075022.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. HKUST Library, on 08 Jun 2018 at 05:59:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                184                               Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou and C. Sun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S HISHKINA , O. & WAGNER , C. 2006 Analysis of thermal dissipation rates in turbulent Rayleigh–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bénard convection. J. Fluid Mech. 546, 51–60.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S HISHKINA , O. & WAGNER , C. 2007 Local heat fluxes in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Phys. Fluids 19, 085107.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S HISHKINA , O. & WAGNER , C. 2008 Analysis of sheet-like thermal plumes in turbulent Rayleigh–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bénard convection. J. Fluid Mech. 599, 383–404.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S ILANO , G., S REENIVASAN , K. R. & V ERZICCO , R. 2010 Numerical simulations of Rayleigh–Bénard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       convection for Prandtl numbers between 10−1 and 104 and Rayleigh numbers between 105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       and 109 . J. Fluid Mech. 662, 409–446.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S TEVENS , R. J. A. M., L OHSE , D. & V ERZICCO , R. 2011 Prandtl and Rayleigh number dependence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of heat transport in high Rayleigh number thermal convection. J. Fluid Mech. 688, 31–43.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S TEVENS , R. J. A. M., V ERZICCO , R. & L OHSE , D. 2010 Radial boundary layer structure and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Nusselt number in Rayleigh–Bénard convection. J. Fluid Mech. 643, 495–507.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S UGIYAMA , K., C ALZAVARINI , E., G ROSSMANN , S. & L OHSE , D. 2009 Flow organization in two-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dimensional non-Oberbeck–Boussinesq Rayleigh–Bénard convection in water. J. Fluid Mech.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       637, 105–135.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S UGIYAMA , K., N I , R., S TEVENS , R. J. A. M., C HAN , T.-S., Z HOU , S.-Q., X I , H.-D., S UN ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C., G ROSSMANN , S., X IA , K.-Q. & L OHSE , D. 2010 Flow reversals in thermally driven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 034503.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S UN , C., R EN , L.-Y., S ONG , H. & X IA , K.-Q. 2005 Heat transport by turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       convection in 1 m diameter cylindrical cells of widely varying aspect ratio. J. Fluid Mech.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       542, 165–174.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S UN , C. & X IA , K.-Q. 2005 Scaling of the Reynolds number in turbulent thermal convection. Phys.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rev. E 72, 067302.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S UN , C. & Z HOU , Q. 2014 Experimental techniques for turbulent Taylor–Couette flow and Rayleigh–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bénard convection. Nonlinearity 27, R89–R121.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V ERZICCO , R. 2003 Turbulent thermal convection in a closed domain: viscous boundary layer and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mean flow effects. Eur. Phys. J. B 35, 133–141.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V ERZICCO , R. & C AMUSSI , R. 2003 Numerical experiments on strongly turbulent thermal convection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       in a slender cylindrical cell. J. Fluid Mech. 477, 19–49.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V ERZICCO , R. & S REENIVASAN , K. R. 2008 A comparison of turbulent thermal convection between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       conditions of constant temperature and constant heat flux. J. Fluid Mech. 595, 203–219.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WAGNER , S., S HISHKINA , O. & WAGNER , C. 2012 Boundary layers and wind in cylindrical Rayleigh–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bénard cells. J. Fluid Mech. 697, 336–366.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W HITEHEAD , J. P. & D OERING , C. R. 2011 Ultimate state of two-dimensional Rayleigh–Bénard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       convection between free-slip fixed-temperature boundaries. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 244501.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z HOU , Q. 2013 Temporal evolution and scaling of mixing in two-dimensional Rayleigh–Taylor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       turbulence. Phys. Fluids 25, 085107.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z HOU , Q., H UANG , Y.-X., L U , Z.-M., L IU , Y.-L. & N I , R. 2016 Scale-to-scale energy and enstrophy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       transport in two-dimensional Rayleigh–Taylor turbulence. J. Fluid Mech. 786, 294–308.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z HOU , Q. & J IANG , L.-F. 2016 Kinetic and thermal energy dissipation rates in two-dimensional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rayleigh–Taylor turbulence. Phys. Fluids 28, 045109.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z HOU , Q., L IU , B.-F., L I , C.-M. & Z HONG , B.-C. 2012 Aspect ratio dependence of heat transport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       by turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection in rectangular cells. J. Fluid Mech. 710, 260–276.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z HOU , Q., S UGIYAMA , K., S TEVENS , R. J. A. M., G ROSSMANN , S., L OHSE , D. & X IA , K.-Q.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2011 Horizontal structures of velocity and temperature boundary layers in two-dimensional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       numerical turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard convection. Phys. Fluids 23, 125104.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z HOU , Q. & X IA , K.-Q. 2010 Measured instantaneous viscous boundary layer in turbulent Rayleigh–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bénard convection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 104301.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z HOU , Q. & X IA , K.-Q. 2013 Thermal boundary layer structure in turbulent Rayleigh–Bénard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       convection in a rectangular cell. J. Fluid Mech. 721, 199–224.
