                                                           Comparison of different Propagation Steps
                                                              for the Lattice Boltzmann Method
                                                     Markus Wittmanna , Thomas Zeisera , Georg Hagera , Gerhard Welleinb
                                             a
                                                 Erlangen Regional Computing Center (RRZE), University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany
                                                      b
                                                        Department of Computer Science, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany
arXiv:1111.0922v1 [cs.DC] 3 Nov 2011




                                       Abstract
                                       Several possibilities exist to implement the propagation step of the lattice Boltzmann method.
                                       This paper describes common implementations which are compared according to the number
                                       of memory transfer operations they require per lattice node update. A memory bandwidth
                                       based performance model is then used to obtain an estimation of the maximum reachable
                                       performance on different machines. A subset of the discussed implementations of the prop-
                                       agation step were benchmarked on different Intel and AMD-based compute nodes using the
                                       framework of an existing flow solver which is specially adapted to simulate flow in porous me-
                                       dia. Finally the estimated performance is compared to the measured one. As expected, the
                                       number of memory transfers has a significant impact on performance. Advanced approaches
                                       for the propagation step like “AA pattern” or “Esoteric Twist” require more implementa-
                                       tion effort but often sustain significantly better performance than non-naı̈ve straightforward
                                       implementations.
                                       Keywords: Lattice Boltzmann Method, Propagation, Two-Step Algorithm, One-Step
                                       Algorithm, Compressed Grid, Swap Algorithm, AA Pattern, Esoteric Twist



                                       1. Introduction
                                           The lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) [1] is used in computational fluid dynamics to
                                       simulate incompressible flows. Physically, the discrete time step in a LBM simulation con-
                                       sists of collision and propagation. In the collision step the particle collisions are modeled.
                                       The propagation step streams the new information to neighboring nodes. This paper gives
                                       an overview on several techniques that can be used to accomplish propagation and discusses
                                       how to optimize propagation with respect to performance.
                                           Different stencil types can be applied for the lattice Boltzmann method. In general
                                       they are named DdQq, where d describes the dimension (two or three dimensional) and q

                                          Email addresses: markus.wittmann@rrze.uni-erlangen.de (Markus Wittmann),
                                       thomas.zeiser@rrze.uni-erlangen.de (Thomas Zeiser), georg.hager@rrze.uni-erlangen.de (Georg
                                       Hager), gerhard.wellein@rrze.uni-erlangen.de (Gerhard Wellein)

                                       Preprint submitted to Computers & Mathematics with Applications                   November 27, 2024
denominates the number of particle distribution functions (PDFs). Typical examples are
D2Q9 or D3Q19.
    The propagation step is usually independent of the underlying lattice type as data always
has to be streamed to neighboring nodes. However, depending on how nodes are allocated
in memory, neighboring nodes can be determined either by simple index arithmetic (“direct
addressing of a full grid”) or by indirect addressing [2, 3] (“sparse, pseudo-unstructured
representation of the underlying Cartesian grid”; an index array “IDX” holds the full adja-
cency information of all nodes, i.e. the q − 1 neighbors per node). In this paper we discuss
both, direct and indirect addressing. The PDFs of both lattice types can be represented by
a propagation-optimized structure of arrays (SoA) data layout where each direction of the
discrete velocities is stored in its own array, or by a collision-optimized array of structures
(AoS) data layout. With AoS only one array exists and the PDFs are stored node-wise.
Typically, SoA results in better cache utilization without reverting to loop blocking or sim-
ilar techniques [10]. The benchmark measurements discussed in Section 10 use a framework
which implements indirect addressing and the SoA data layout.
    Memory bandwidth is a major bottleneck of all modern general purpose computers.
Hierarchies of caches have been introduced since many years to mitigate the limited memory
transfer rate. Data typically has to be moved from and to main memory in chunks of cache
lines (128 bytes). Data in main memory cannot be modified directly, but the corresponding
cache line has to be loaded from main memory to cache first. Finally, the cache line will
be evicted back to main memory [13]. This three-step procedure occurs automatically and
fully transparently. The process of loading data to cache to allow modification is called
write allocate or read for ownership (RFO) and ensures consistency of data in all memory
domains and hierarchies of multi-core/multi-socket compute nodes. Non-temporal stores are
a special case as they bypass the cache hierarchy and directly write to main memory.
    This paper is organized as follows: First the basic two-step algorithm is introduced
in Section 2 where collision and propagation are handled separately in two steps. The
one-step algorithm in Section 3 fuses the collision and propagation into one step. Both
previous algorithms usually use two lattices to easily avoid data dependencies. As memory
is valuable, algorithms were developed which elude the data dependencies and thus can
go with one lattice. The compressed grid algorithm of Pohl et al. [4] in Section 4 shifts
values back and forth in one lattice between time steps. The swap algorithm of Mattila
et al. [5] and Latt [6] in Section 5 uses a strict processing order and swapping of PDFs to
circumvent data dependencies. Bailey et al.’s AA-pattern [7] discussed in Section 6 requires
two different lattice Boltzmann kernels for updating the single lattice. Section 7 evaluates
the esoteric twist algorithm of Geier et al. [8, 9], which uses pointer swapping after each
time step. Our test bed for the benchmark measurements is introduced in Section 8, and
a performance model including estimates for the different propagation models is presented
in Section 9. A set of these algorithms were implemented and achieved performance is
compared to predictions in Section 10. The summary in Section 11 concludes the paper.

Related Work. Pohl et al. [4] compared an implementation of the one-step algorithm with
the compressed grid technique. In [10], Wellein et al. analyzed different data layouts in
                                              2
                     direct addressing                       indirect addressing
                #    type comment                       #       type comment
                            collision                                 collision
                q    PDF loads A                        q       PDF loads A
                q    PDF write allocate B               q − 1 IDX stores into B
                q    PDF stores B                       q       PDF write allocate B
                                                        q       PDF stores B
                             propagation                            propagation
                q    PDF     loads B                  q       PDF loads B
                q    PDF     write allocate A         q − 1 IDX stores into A
                q    PDF     stores A                 q       PDF write allocate A
                                                      q       PDF stores A
                Σ = 6q ∗ PDFs                       Σ = 6q ∗ PDFs + 2(q − 1) ∗ IDXs


Table 1: Estimating the data requirements for the two-step algorithm for one complete lattice node update.


combination with the one-step algorithm on a wide range of different architectures. Mat-
tila et al. compared in [5] implementations of the two-step, one-step, compressed grid,
swap, and Langrangian algorithms with direct, semi-direct, and indirect addressing.
   Using temporal blocking (e.g. [4]) or wavefront techniques (e.g. [11]) are another ap-
proach to reduce the required memory bandwidth. However, all these latter approaches
which exploit the increase of temporal locality by fusing several time steps are beyond the
scope of this paper.

2. Two-Step Two-Grid Algorithm
    The two-step algorithm (TS) is a naı̈ve approach taking collision and propagation literally
as two separate steps. In the worst case two lattices A and B are used where A holds
the PDFs of the nodes (often denoted as fi ) and B the intermediate post-collision pre-
propagation values (often denoted fi∗ ). For each node in lattice A the collision is performed
and the newly computed PDFs are stored at the same spatial location but in array B. The
following propagation step (i.e. a different loop over all nodes) streams the post-collision
values from array B of a node to its neighbor back into lattice A to have the PDFs of the
next time step.
    This algorithm is very memory bandwidth intensive as data has to be transferred several
times in each time step over the memory bus. An overview of the memory transfers for one
lattice node update is given in Tab. 1.

3. One-Step Two-Grid Algorithm
    In the one-step algorithm (OS) collision and propagation are fused. For a node in lattice
A the collision is performed (Fig 1(a)). The post-collision values of this node are immediately
streamed to their neighbors and stored in lattice B (Fig 1(b)). After all nodes have been
                                                    3
   (a) Push: lattice A.       (b) Push: lattice B.       (c) Pull: lattice A.      (d) Pull: lattice B.

Figure 1: The one-step algorithm for push and pull scheme. Particle distribution functions (PDFs) are
read from lattice A (a) and after collision they are written to lattice B (b). This scheme is also known as
push whereas for pull the propagation (c) takes place before the collision (d).


                     direct addressing                      indirect addressing
                 #   type comment                      #       type comment
                 q   PDF loads A                       q       PDF loads A
                 q   PDF write allocate B              q − 1 IDX stores into B
                 q   PDF stores B                      q       PDF write allocate B
                                                       q       PDF stores B
                 Σ = 3q ∗ PDFs                       Σ = 3q ∗ PDFs + (q − 1) ∗ IDXs


Table 2: Estimating the data requirements for the one-step algorithm. The table shows only the store and
load order for push scheme, which is different to the pull scheme. Despite the actual number of memory
accesses and accesses types is the same.


updated, lattice pointers to A and B are swapped and the iteration starts over. Table 2
summarizes the memory accesses for a single node update.
    Performing collision before propagation is referred to as the push scheme. The post-
collision values are scattered to their neighbors. Swapping the two steps, i.e. arranging
propagation before collision, is called pull scheme and data has to be gathered from the
neighbors. Both schemes can be used together with the one-step algorithm resulting in the
same number of memory accesses.
    Performing collision and propagation together requires only loading from A and storing to
B once, which reduces the required memory bandwidth for a node update by 50 % compared
to the worst-case two-step two-grid algorithm.

Non-temporal stores. Push and pull scheme only write to array B. With non-temporal
stores, which bypass the cache hierarchy, the write allocate can be avoided, reducing the
overall memory traffic by 1/3. A particularly efficient implementation (OS-NT) is OS with
pull and SoA as SIMD-vectorized instructions and non-temporal stores can be used to write
to consecutive memory. All stores must now be performed on addresses which are a multiple
of 16 (for SSE). Since at least two elements are written at once, the SoA data layout is
required. For direct addressing each line in the lattice must be correctly aligned and thus

                                                     4
may need padding. In case of indirect addressing only each array (i.e. the q arrays of the q
direct velocity directions) must be correctly aligned.
    Modern x86 architectures can only sustain a small number of concurrent non-temporal
store streams without incurring a performance penalty. To reduce the number of concurrent
write streams, collision/propagation has to be spatially blocked using chunks of a certain
length l, e.g., 150 nodes. The original PDFs and some calculated values (e.g., the macro-
scopic values of one block) are first transferred to a temporary array to hold the data of
the l nodes in the innermost cache. In q (OS-NT, Pull, 1S) or q/2 (OS-NT, Pull, 2S) sub-
sequent loops, collision and propagation takes place by fetching the required input data
from the temporary array (which still is in cache), doing the calculations, and writing the
post-collision values back to lattice B using non-temporal stores. Using pairs of opposing
directions is particularly useful for TRT as they share common sub-expressions; however,
compilers may generate write streams with only one non-temporal store. Thus, it may be
required to use q loops with length l each to have exactly one concurrent write stream only.
    Bandwidth requirements for one node are reduced for the full array type and indirect
addressing by q ∗ sizeof (PDF ) bytes, which results in 2 ∗ q ∗ sizeof (PDF ) bytes/node update
for the full array and 2 ∗ q ∗ sizeof (PDF ) + (q − 1) ∗ siezof (IDX ) bytes/node for indirect
addressing. Accesses to the temporary array are neglected in our simple performance model
as it is so small that it can be kept in L1 cache and it is assumed that accessing L1 cache
is orders of magnitude faster than accessing memory. The assumption of infinitely fast
L1 access may not be correct for all architectures (in particular AMD Opterons with their
exclusive caches).

4. Compressed Grid
    The compressed grid technique (CG) of Pohl et al. [4], also known as the shift algo-
rithm [7] puts the two lattices previously needed on top of each other and shifted by one
cell in each direction. Thus, only one lattice has to be stored, plus one layer of cells in each
dimension. The data dependency between the nodes is broken by writing updated PDFs
to the lattice node shifted by the vector s. For even time steps the iteration takes place
from top right to bottom left as in Fig. 2(a) and s = se = (1, 1)T . In odd time steps,
iteration is performed from the bottom left to top right as in Fig. 2(b) with a shift vector
of s = so = (−1, −1)T . Although the description is given for the 2D case this can be easily
extended to 3D. Details about the memory transfers involved are provided in Tab. 3.
    Only one kernel is needed, with the update order of the lattice nodes alternating be-
tween successive time steps. Depending on the compiler, it might be beneficial to have a
separate loop for each direction so that the SIMD vectorizer has all the needed information.
Compressed grid can be used with the push and the pull scheme.

5. Swap Algorithm
    The swap algorithm (SWAP) of Matilla et al. [5] and Latt [6] falls also into the class
of propagation methods which require only one lattice. Data dependencies are circumvented
                                               5
                              (a) Even time step.        (b) Odd time step.

Figure 2: Schematic sketch of the compressed grid technique requiring only on lattice. Iteration order is
alternated between two time steps. Together with a lattice increased by one cell in each dimension the data
dependencies are broken.




                  direct addressing                         indirect addressing
              #      type comment                     #      type comment
              q      PDF loads                        q      PDF loads
              q − 1 PDF write allocate                q − 1 IDX loads
              q      PDF stores                       q − 1 PDF write allocate
                                                      q      PDF stores
              Σ = (3q − 1) ∗ PDFs                   Σ = (3q − 1) ∗ PDFs + (q − 1) ∗ IDXs


         Table 3: Estimating the data requirements for one node update with compressed grid.




                                                     6
               (a) Reached node to             (b) Collision.            (c) After Swap.
               update.

Figure 3: The swap algorithm for the push scheme. Nodes which have not been updated in the current
iteration have their PDFs stored at opposing locations (black arrows in (a)). Post-collision PDFs are written
back to their natural location (red arrows in (b)). All PDFs pointing to neighbor nodes that have already
been visited in this iteration are swapped with those neighbor PDFs pointing to them (green arrows in (c)).



by a strict processing order of the lattice nodes and by continuously swapping half of a node’s
PDFs with its neighbors’. Iteration over the lattice nodes takes place in lexicographic order.
Which PDFs to swap depends on whether the push or pull scheme is used.
    In case of the push scheme, PDFs of nodes that have not yet been visited in the current
iteration are stored at the “opposing” location (black arrows in Fig. 3(a)), i.e. pointing
to the center PDF of a node. When a node is reached (Fig. 3(a)) its PDFs are read and
collided. The post-collision PDFs are written back to their “natural” location (red arrows
in Fig. 3(b)). All PDFs that now point to neighbor nodes that have already been visited
are swapped with the neighbor PDFs pointing to them (Fig. 3(c)).
    In the swap algorithm the propagation step is implicitly performed by swapping PDFs.
Special care has to be taken if data is processed after the end of the time step as the “PDFs
of a node” are not all local.
    After the whole lattice has been updated, PDFs of nodes at the boundaries which have
not been swapped have to be swapped. At the beginning of the iteration, PDFs which are
located at the boundary of the lattice must also be swapped or manually initialized. In
general, blocking can be performed, but it generates additional overhead as the PDF values
at block boundary must be swapped manually.
    Using pull instead of the push scheme is also possible. Here, the PDFs of the current
node (black arrows in Fig. 4(a)) have to be swapped first. The PDFs pointing to neighbor
nodes that have not already been visited are swapped with the neighbor PDFs pointing to
them (green arrows) as in Fig. 4(b). Now all PDFs needed for collision are located at the
local node. Note that the PDFs are located at opposing locations. These PDFs are read
and collided. All post-collision PDFs are written back and stored in their natural position
in the local node (red arrows in Fig. 4(c)).
    The required transfers and the different load/store order for both schemes can be found
in Tab. 4.




                                                     7
              (a) Reached node to           (b) After Swap.             (c) Collision.
              update.

Figure 4: The swap algorithm for the pull scheme. For a node to update (black arrows in (a)) first the
swap is performed. PDFs of this node, pointing to neighbor nodes which have not already been visited are
swapped with those neighbor PDFs pointing to them (green arrows in (b)). After the PDFs of the local
node have been read and collided the post-collision PDFs (red arrows) are written back to their natural
position (c).




             direct addressing                                       indirect addressing
  #             type comment                             #             type comment
  push scheme
                      collision                                                collision
  q             PDF loads                                q            PDF      loads
  (q + 1)/2     PDF stores local                         (q + 1)/2    PDF      stores local
  (q − 1)/2     PDF load remote for swap                 (q − 1)/2    IDX      for swap with remote
  q−1           PDF store for swap                       (q − 1)/2    PDF      load remote for swap
                                                         q−1          PDF      stores for swap
  pull scheme
  q                PDF    loads                          q           PDF loads
  (q − 1)/2        PDF    load remote for swap           (q − 1)/2 IDX for swap with remote
  (q − 1)/2        PDF    store remote for swap          (q − 1)/2 PDF load remote for swap
  q                PDF    stores local                   (q − 1)/2 PDF store remote for swap
                                                         q           PDF stores local
  Σ = (3q − 1) ∗ PDFs                                  Σ = (3q − 1) ∗ PDFs + (q − 1)/2 ∗ IDXs


Table 4: Estimation of data requirements for one node update with the swap algorithm using the push or
pull scheme.




                                                   8
  (a) Even time step:        (b) Even time step:          (c) Odd time      step:   (d) Odd time        step:
  read PDFs.                 store PDFs.                  read PDFs.                store PDFs.

Figure 5: Schematic sketch of the AA pattern. At even time steps only node-local PDFs are accessed.
They are read (black arrows in (a)), collided, and post-collision values (red arrows) are written back to their
opposing position (b). At odd time steps only PDFs of neighbor nodes are accessed (black arrows in (c)),
except the rest particle. After they have been read and collided, they are written back so they point away
of the local node’s center (red arrows in (d)).



6. AA Pattern
    The AA pattern (AAP) of Bailey et al. [7] requires only one lattice similar to the swap
algorithm, but the processing order of the lattice nodes is not restricted in any way. The
algorithm is inherently parallel, which means that nodes can be updated independently of
each other. This makes it attractive for general purpose GPUs (GPGPUs), where memory
capacity is low and massive parallelism is required to achieve reasonable performance. How-
ever, the algorithm is more complex and consists of different access patterns in even and
odd time steps.
    At even time steps only collisions are performed. PDFs of lattice nodes which have not
been updated are in their natural position (black arrows) as shown in Fig. 5(a). For collision,
PDFs of one node are read, collided, and post-collision PDFs (red arrows) are written back
to the same node but at their opposing location Fig. 5(b), i.e. their orientation is locally
swapped.
    Odd time steps act like propagation – collision – propagation. PDFs from neighbors
pointing to the current node (shown as black arrows in Fig. 5(c)) are read (first propaga-
tion). After they haven been collided the post-collision PDFs (red arrows) are stored at
the previously read locations, but now again in the natural orientation (second propagation
with rotation, Fig. 5(d)). An overview of the data requirements is given in Tab. 5.
    These two different alternating steps require two different versions of all routines dealing
with the PDFs in the lattice. At least the collide-propagate kernel and the in-/outlet routines
are affected.
    A really nice feature from the hardware point of view is that during the same update
step writes are performed only to locations that were previously read. This eliminates the
write allocate in the cache hierarchy, because the needed cache line to store to is already
present. So each time step whether it is even or odd only requires q loads and q stores only.


                                                      9
                     direct addressing                        indirect addressing
                #    type comment                      #         type comment
                            even time-steps                             even time-steps
                q    PDF loads                         q         PDF loads local
                q    PDF stores                        q         PDF stores local
                              odd time-steps                           odd time-steps
                q    PDF      loads                    q        PDF loads remote
                q    PDF      stores                   q        PDF store remote
                                                       (q − 1) IDX access neighbors
                Σ = 2q ∗ PDFs                        Σ = 2q ∗ PDFs + (q − 1)/2 ∗ IDXs


Table 5: Estimation of data requirements for one node update with the AA pattern. Direct addressing
requires always q loads and q stores no matter whether the time step is even or odd. With indirect addressing
for odd time steps where PDFs of neighbors are accessed additional q − 1 look-ups in the adjacency list
(IDX) are required. These additional loads are equally distributed over both types of time steps for the final
sum of bytes required per node update.


7. Esoteric Twist
    The esoteric twist algorithm (ET) of Geier et al. [8, 9] shares some characteristics
with Bailey’s AA pattern, like the single lattice requirement and that it is intrinsically
parallel. However this algorithm requires only one incarnation of the LB kernel, in-/outlet,
etc. functions, which is beneficial when development time and maintainability of the code
matters. The fact that only one lattice is needed and nodes can be updated independently
of each other makes it again a good candidate for the usage on GPGPUS.
    Independently whether direct or indirect addressing is used, a structure of array (SoA)
data layout for accessing the PDFs is required, where the control structure contains pointer
to the arrays of the different PDF directions.
    With esoteric twist, the PDFs belonging to one node are only the half centered around
the node. The rest are the PDFs pointing to the node’s local PDFs. These are the black
arrows in Fig. 6(a). The PDFs are read, collided and written back to the opposite direction
as Fig. 6(b) shows. After each node of the lattice has been updated, the pointers of opposing
discrete velocity directions in the control structure are exchanged. These pointer swaps not
only recreates the shape of the lattice to the one before the update. In fact, it performs the
propagation as Fig. 6(c) depicts. Details on the transferred data are found in Tab. 6.
    Only writes to locations from where previously was read from occur in the algorithm.
This eliminates additional loads for the write allocate of the cache hierarchy. The swap of
pointers at the end of each iteration is negligible.

8. Test Bed
  As test bed for our quantitative performance predictions and the performance measure-
ments we used four different machines. Details of the systems can be found in Tab. 7.

                                                     10
  (a) Reached node to             (b) Collision.           (c) Before    pointer    (d) After pointer swap.
  update.                                                  swap.

Figure 6: Schematic sketch of the esoteric twist. For updating a node its local and remote PDFs (indicated
by the black arrows) are read (a), collided, and written back to opposing directions (red arrows in (b)). After
each node has been updated in that way (c), the pointers of opposing PDF directions in the control structure
are swapped, which implicitly performs the propagation (d).




                 direct addressing                       indirect addressing
                # type comment                  #          type comment
                q PDF loads                     (q + 1)/2 IDX access neighbor links
                q PDF stores                    q          PDF loads
                                                q          PDF stores
                Σ = 2q ∗ PDFs                 Σ = 2q ∗ PDFs + (q + 1)/2 ∗ IDXs


                Table 6: Data requirements for one node update with the esoteric twist.




                                                      11
                               Harpertown       Westmere      SandyBridge      MagnyCours
   Name                          Intel Xeon     Intel Xeon       Intel Xeon           AMD
                                     X5482          X5650          E3-1280     Opteron 6134
   Freq. [GHz]                          3.20           2.67             3.50           2.30
    max [GHz]                              –           3.06             3.90              –
   Cores                              2×2                 6                4          2×4
   FLOP/cycle/core                         4              4         4 (SSE)               4
   Peak Perf. [GFLOP/s]                102.4        128.16              56.0          147.2
   L1 [KiB]                               32             32               32             64
   L2 [KiB]                             6144            256              256            512
   L3 [MiB]                                –             12                8              5
   Sockets                                 2              2                1              2
   NUMA domains                            1              2                1              4
   STREAM Copy BW
    Core [GB/s]                           5.4          10.1             17.5             12.3
    Socket [GB/s]                         7.2          21.0             18.4             25.0
    Node [GB/s]                           7.0          40.6             18.4             49.0
   Machine Balance
                                         0.09          0.32             0.33             0.33
    Bmachine [byte/FLOP]


Table 7: Used test bed for performance evaluation. Copy stream bandwidth measured with McCalpin’s
STREAM [12] but using non-temporal stores. For computing the machine balance Bmachine the STREAM
copy bandwidth of the full node was used.


    The “Harpertown” system is a UMA system with two quad-core Intel Xeon X5482 CPUs
at 3.2 GHz. Each core has a separate 32 KiB L1 cache and two cores each share a 6 MiB L2
cache.
    The “Westmere” system is a two socket ccNUMA systems with hexa-core Intel Xeon
X5650 CPUs supporting SMT and operating at 2.67 GHz. Each core has 32 KiB L1 data
cache and 256 KiB L2 cache. Each chip has a 12 MiB L3 cache shared by the six cores.
    The “SandyBridge” system is a Desktop-like node based on a quad-core Intel Xeon E3-
1280 CPU at 3.5 GHz having only one NUMA domain, which makes the system behaving
like a UMA system. All cores have a separate 64 KiB L1 and a separate 512 KiB L2 cache.
The 8 MiB L3 cache is shared by all cores. With AVX instructions, the peak performance
of SandyBridge is twice the one reported in Tab. 7 with SSE. However, the AVX extension
of the instruction set is not used in the present study.
    The two-socket “MagnyCours” system uses eight-core AMD Opteron 6134 CPUs running
at 2.30 GHz. Each CPU package comprises two dies with four cores each. The L1 data cache
with 64 KiB and the L2 cache with 512 KiB are separate for each core and the 5 MiB L3
cache is shared by all four cores on a die. Each die forms its own NUMA domain resulting
in four domains for the whole system.



                                                12
             propagation            full array                indirect addressing
             model               PDFs bytes
                                        LUP
                                              Bcode         PDFs IDXs bytes
                                                                          LUP
                                                                               Bcode
             TS                   114 912      4.56          114     36 1056    5.28
             OS                    57 456      2.28           57     18   528   2.64
             OS-NT                 38 304      1.52           38     18   376   1.88
             CG                    56 448      2.24           56     18   520   2.60
             SWAP                  56 448      2.24          114     36   484   2.42
             AAP                   38 304      1.52           38      9   340   1.70
             ET                    38 304      1.52           38     10   344   1.72


Table 8: Code balance Bcode (in bytes/FLOP) for different implementations of the propagation step with a
D3Q19 stencil when a full array or indirect addressing is used. Note: size of a PDF and an IDX element is
eight byte and four byte, respectively.


9. Performance Model
    To estimate the performance that can be expected from the different implementations
of the propagation step, a simple memory bandwidth based performance model [13] is used.
This type of prediction works for loop kernels if i) the performance of the code is limited
by the memory bandwidth and not by the computational performance and ii) the cache
bandwidth is much larger than the memory bandwidth. For modern multicore chips, the
model usually works well only if several cores that share a memory bus are utilized, even
with memory-bound code [14].
    A code is memory bound if its code balance Bcode is larger than the machine balance
Bmachine of the system it should run on.
    The code balance is the ratio of bytes required compared to the computations performed
by the code in the kernel:
                                          transferred bytes      byte
                            Bcode =                                   .                              (1)
                                      floating-point operations FLOP
   In our case, this number is obtained by dividing the data requirements for each of the
implementations by the number of FLOPs required for a lattice node update, which in our
case of D3Q19 TRT is about 200 FLOPs. The results for double precision (8-byte) PDFs
and 32-bit integers for the index array can be seen in Tab. 8.
   The machine balance Bmachine on the other hand is defined as follows:

                                    peak memory bandwidth        bytes/s
                    Bmachine =                                           ,                           (2)
                                 peak floating-point performance FLOP/s
where we again assume double precision floating-point arithmetic. Table 7 shows Bmachine
for all machines in the test bed. The actual machine balance may be slightly worse on the
Intel Westmere and SandyBridge platform since clock frequency may be higher depending
on the computational load due to Intel’s “Turbo Mode” feature.


                                                   13
                              (a) Slice in the xy plane.                             (b) Slice in the
                                                                                     yz plane.

Figure 7: Slices of a packed bed reactor of spheres used as benchmark geometry. Blue indicates fluid cells
and red solid cells.



     Comparing Bcode of the implementations with Bmachine of the machines in the test bed
shows that Bcode > Bmachine always holds in our case. Thus, the memory bandwidth model
can be applied to approximate an upper performance limit. Expected performance results
are drawn as short lines in the performance graphs in Section 10. All implementations will
still be memory bound even if SIMD vectorization is neglected and the system’s lower scalar
peak floating-point performance (not shown in Tab. 7) is used to calculate Bmachine .
     The code and machine balance can also be defined with single precision floating-point
arithmetic. For the code balance this would reduce the required bytes by half, and the
number of floating-point operations per core and cycle for the machine balance would be
doubled. So the ratio between code and machine balance would stay the same.
     All architectures in the test bed have separate floating-point units for addition and multi-
plication. Thus, the peak floating-point performance only can be achieved if two conditions
are fulfilled: First, the code must have a balanced number of additions and multiplications to
keep the units continuously busy. Second, for all floating-point operations packed arithmetic
instructions must be used, i.e., packed SSE/AVX instructions on Intel and AMD machines.

10. Performance Results
     We used the ILBDC (International Lattice Boltzmann Developer Consortium) flow solver
[3], which is optimized for simulating the flow through porous media. It uses indirect address-
ing, a D3Q19 lattice, a two-relaxation-time (TRT) collision model [15], and double precision
floating-point arithmetic. During the MPI-parallel simulation, each process holds the same
number of fluid nodes [3, 16]. For compilation the Intel Fortran/C Compiler 11.1.075 was
used together with Intel MPI 4.0.1.007. A packed bed of spheres (Fig. 7) and an empty
channel were used as as benchmark geometries, both with the dimension of 500 × 100 × 100
cells resulting in ≈ 2, 100, 000 and ≈ 5, 000, 000 fluid cells, respectively.
     For performance evaluation, several setup strategies of the indirect addressing were
benchmarked and the best was chosen for each machine and propagation model. The sparse
representation setup for indirect addressing is explained in more detail in [3, 16].
     Due to the structure of the existing code not all propagation models discussed in this
paper have been implemented so far. Hence, only performance measurements of the one-step
algorithm (OS) with push and pull, the one-step algorithm with pull and non-temporal stores
                                                    14
                                        30                                                           30
                                             OS, Push                                                     OS, Push
                                             OS, Pull                                                     OS, Pull
                                        25   OS-NT, Pull, 1S                                         25   OS-NT, Pull, 1S
                performance [MFLUP/s]




                                                                             performance [MFLUP/s]
                                             OS-NT, Pull, 2S                                              OS-NT, Pull, 2S
                                             AAP                                                          AAP
                                        20                                                           20

                                        15                                                           15

                                        10                                                           10

                                         5                                                            5

                                         0                                                            0
                                             1      2           4   8                                     1      2           4   8
                                                        cores                                                        cores
                                                 (a) Channel                                                  (b) Packing

Figure 8: Performance of different propagation step implementations on Harpertown for the channel and
packing benchmark geometry. Black lines indicate the maximum achievable performance expected by the
bandwidth-based performance model in main memory.



(OS-NT, Pull) and the AA pattern (AAP) are discussed in the following. It is expected that
esoteric twist performs similar to the AA pattern since its memory access behavior and the
number of required bytes per LUP is the same. All shown results were obtained with the
SoA data layout.

Harpertown. Figure 8 shows the performance with the implemented propagation steps for
the channel and packing geometry. The black lines mark the expected performance from
the memory bandwidth model. If a socket is not fully utilized (one and two cores) only a
fraction of the expected performance is reached. Using full sockets instead (four and eight
cores), however, the performance model is quite accurate. Thus, the LBM implementation
cannot saturate the memory bandwidth with a single core in contrast to the much simpler
STREAM benchmark.
    OS with push and pull shows no significant difference in performance. Interestingly
OS-NT with q store loops (OS-NT, Pull, 1S) performs significantly better than the version
with q/2 store loops (OS-NT, Pull, 2S). In the latter version the compiler generates only
one non-temporal store. The mix of temporal and non-temporal stores in one loop seems
counterproductive on this microarchitecture.

Westmere. As expected from a ccNUMA system, performance scales across sockets (see
Fig. 9). The OS algorithm achieves around 80 % of the expected performance on a full
socket, independent of whether the push or the pull scheme is used. OS-NT achieves better
performance than OS, but sustains less than 80 % of the expected value. The reason is
that NT stores make less effective use of the memory interface on Intel architectures; the
gain from the saved write-allocate transfer outweighs this drawback, however. Best perfor-
mance is again achieved with AAP. A sustained performance of more than 100 MLUPs for

                                                                        15
                                      120   OS, Push                                            120   OS, Push
                                            OS, Pull                                                  OS, Pull
                                            OS-NT, Pull, 1S                                           OS-NT, Pull, 1S
              performance [MFLUP/s]   100                                                       100




                                                                        performance [MFLUP/s]
                                            OS-NT, Pull, 2S                                           OS-NT, Pull, 2S
                                            AAP                                                       AAP
                                      80                                                        80

                                      60                                                        60

                                      40                                                        40

                                      20                                                        20

                                       0                                                         0
                                            1           6     12                                      1           6     12
                                                      cores                                                     cores
                                                (a) Channel                                               (b) Packing

Figure 9: Performance of different propagation step implementations on Westmere for the channel and
packing benchmark geometry. Black lines indicate the maximum achievable performance expected by the
bandwidth-based performance model in main memory.



D3Q19/TRT in double precision on a single two-socket compute node is remarkable.

SandyBridge. For SandyBridge we expect about 45% of the performance of a Westmere
node. None of the implemented algorithms fully meets this expectation. It is remarkable
that there is no significant gain of AAP over OS-NT Pull 1S. As of now we do not have a
conclusive explanation for those peculiarities.

MagnyCours. The performance scales (Fig. 11) across all four NUMA domains. Only around
65 % of the expected performance is reached by all implementations and APP is only at the
level of OS-NT Pull 2S. This suggests that for this architecture the simple performance
model does not work. One explanation might be the exclusive cache architecture [14] of the
MagnyCours CPU, but confirmation requires a more detailed investigation.

11. Summary
    The performance of a lattice Boltzmann based flow simulation is heavily influenced by the
chosen implementation of the propagation step. Implementations like the one-step algorithm
are simple to implement but easily outperformed by more advanced techniques like usage of
non-temporal stores or the AA pattern. Special care has to be taken of machine-dependent
properties like correct padding.
    In this paper we only studied the single-node performance. However, a good single-node
baseline is essential for any massively parallel simulation.

Acknowledgements. We are thankful for lively discussions with Jan Treibig and the careful
proofreading by Rasa Mabande. The hospitality of the Intel Exascale Laboratory at Univer-
sity of Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines while preparing parts of this paper is gratefully
                                                                   16
                                                        80                                                                80
                                                             OS, Push                                                              OS, Push
                                                        70   OS, Pull                                                     70       OS, Pull
                                                             OS-NT, Pull, 1S                                                       OS-NT, Pull, 1S
                                performance [MFLUP/s]




                                                                                                  performance [MFLUP/s]
                                                        60   OS-NT, Pull, 2S                                              60       OS-NT, Pull, 2S
                                                             AAP                                                                   AAP
                                                        50                                                                50

                                                        40                                                                40

                                                        30                                                                30

                                                        20                                                                20

                                                        10                                                                10

                                                         0                                                                 0
                                                                 1            2         4                                          1          2             4
                                                                            cores                                                           cores
                                                                     (a) Channel                                                       (b) Packing

Figure 10: Performance of different propagation step implementations on SandyBridge for the channel
and packing benchmark geometry. Black lines indicate the maximum achievable performance expected by
the bandwidth-based performance model in main memory.




                                                             OS, Push                                                               OS, Push
                                        140                                                                               140
                                                             OS, Pull                                                               OS, Pull
                                                             OS-NT, Pull, 2S                                                        OS-NT, Pull, 2S
                                        120                                                                               120
              performance [MFLUP/s]




                                                                                                  performance [MFLUP/s]




                                                             AAP                                                                    AAP
                                        100                                                                               100

                                                    80                                                                     80

                                                    60                                                                     60

                                                    40                                                                     40

                                                    20                                                                     20

                                                        0                                                                      0
                                                             1          4           8   16                                         1        4           8       16
                                                                            cores                                                               cores
                                                                 (a) Channel                                                           (b) Packing

Figure 11: Performance of different propagation step implementations on MagnyCours for the channel
and packing benchmark geometry. Black lines indicate the maximum achievable performance expected by
the bandwidth-based performance model in main memory.




                                                                                             17
acknowledged by the first author (MW). This work was supported by BMBF under grant
No. 01IH08003A (project SKALB).

References
 [1] S. Succi, The Lattice Boltzmann Equation for Fluid Dynamics and Beyond, Oxford University Press,
     2001.
 [2] C. Pan, J. F. Prins, C. T. Miller, A high-performance lattice Boltzmann implementation to model flow
     in porous media, Computer Physics Communications 158 (2004) 89–105.
 [3] T. Zeiser, G. Hager, G. Wellein, Benchmark analysis and application results for lattice Boltzmann
     simulations on NEC SX vector and Intel Nehalem systems, Parallel Processing Letters 19 (2009)
     491–511.
 [4] T. Pohl, M. Kowarschik, J. Wilke, K. Iglberger, U. Rüde, Optimization and profiling of the cache
     performance of parallel lattice Boltzmann codes, Parallel Processing Letters 13 (2003) 549–560.
 [5] K. Mattila, J. Hyväluoma, T. Rossi, M. Aspnäs, J. Westerholm, An efficient swap algorithm for the
     lattice Boltzmann method, Computer Physics Communications 176 (2007) 200–210.
 [6] J. Latt, How to implement your DdQq dynamics with only q variables per node (instead of 2q),
     Technical Report, Tufts University, Medford, USA, 2007.
 [7] P. Bailey, J. Myre, S. Walsh, D. Lilja, M. Saar, Accelerating lattice Boltzmann fluid flow simulations
     using graphics processors, in: International Conference on Parallel Processing 2009 (ICPP’09).
 [8] M. Schönherr, M. Geier, M. Krafczyk, 3D GPGPU LBM implementation on non-uniform grids, in:
     International Conference on Parallel Computational Fluid Dynamics 2011 (Parallel CFD 2001).
 [9] J. Linxweiler, Ein integrierter Softwareansatz zur interaktiven Exploration und Steuerung von
     Strömungssimulationen auf Many-Core-Architekturen, Ph.D. thesis, Fakultät Architektur, Bauinge-
     nieurwesen und Umweltwissenschaften, TU-Braunschweig, 2011.
[10] G. Wellein, T. Zeiser, G. Hager, S. Donath, On the single processor performance of simple lattice
     Boltzmann kernels, Comput. Fluids 35 (2006) 910–919.
[11] G. Wellein, G. Hager, T. Zeiser, M. Wittmann, H. Fehske, Efficient temporal blocking for sten-
     cil computations by multicore-aware wavefront parallelization, in: Proceedings of the 33rd IEEE
     International Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC 2009), pp. 579–586.
     doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/COMPSAC.2009.82.
[12] J. D. McCalpin, Memory bandwidth and machine balance in current high performance computers,
     IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Computer Architecture (TCCA) Newsletter (1995)
     19–25. http://www.cs.virginia.edu/stream/.
[13] G. Hager, G. Wellein, Introduction to High Performance Computing for Scientists and Engineers, CRC
     Press, 2010. ISBN 978-1439811924.
[14] J. Treibig, G. Hager, Introducing a performance model for bandwidth-limited loop kernels, in:
     R. Wyrzykowski, J. Dongarra, K. Karczewski, J. Wasniewski (Eds.), Parallel Processing and Applied
     Mathematics, volume 6067 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,
     2010, pp. 615–624. dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-14390-8_64.
[15] I. Ginzburg, J.-P. Carlier, C. Kao, Lattice Boltzmann approach to Richards’ equation, in: C. T. Miller
     (Ed.), Computational Methods in Water Resources: Proceedings of the CMWR XV, June 13–17, 2004
     Chapel Hill, NC, USA, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2004, pp. 583–597.
[16] M. Wittmann, T. Zeiser, G. Hager, G. Wellein, Domain decomposition and locality optimization for
     large-scale lattice Boltzmann simulations, Submitted to ParCFD-2011 Special Issue of Computer &
     Fluids (2011).




                                                    18
