                                                     Volumetric lattice Boltzmann method for thermal particulate flows with conjugate heat transfer

                                                                                     Xiaojie Zhang, Donglei Wang, Qing Li, and Rongzong Huang∗
                                                                        School of Energy Science and Engineering, Central South University, 410083 Changsha, China
                                                                                                           (Dated: November 1, 2024)

                                                                    A volumetric lattice Boltzmann (LB) method is developed for the particle-resolved direct numerical sim-
                                                                 ulation of thermal particulate flows with conjugate heat transfer. This method is devised as a single-domain
                                                                 approach by applying the volumetric interpretation of the LB equation and introducing a solid fraction field to
arXiv:2410.23802v1 [physics.comp-ph] 31 Oct 2024




                                                                 represent the particle. The volumetric LB scheme is employed to enforce the nonslip velocity condition in the
                                                                 solid domain, and a specialized momentum exchange scheme is proposed to calculate the hydrodynamic force
                                                                 and torque acting on the particle. To uniformly solve the temperature field over the entire domain with high
                                                                 numerical fidelity, an energy conservation equation is first derived by reformulating the convection term into a
                                                                 source term. A corresponding LB equation is then devised to automatically achieve the conjugate heat transfer
                                                                 condition and correctly handle the differences in thermophysical properties. Theoretical analysis of this LB
                                                                 equation is also performed to derive the constraints to preserve the numerical fidelity even near the solid-fluid
                                                                 interface. Numerical tests are first performed to validate the present volumetric LB method in various aspects.
                                                                 Then, the sedimentation of a cold particle with conjugate heat transfer in a long channel is investigated. It is
                                                                 found that the sedimentation process can be divided into the accelerating, decelerating, and equilibrium stages.
                                                                 As a further application to dense particulate flows, the sedimentation of 2048 cold particles with conjugate heat
                                                                 transfer in a square cavity is simulated. The particulate Rayleigh-Bénard convection is successfully captured in
                                                                 this particle-resolved simulation.




                                                                                                             I.   INTRODUCTION


                                                     Accurate and efficient simulation of particulate flows is significant in many industrial fields, such as chemical, metallurgy,
                                                   energy, and microfluidics [1–4]. Understanding the transport behaviors of particulate flows has attracted considerable attention
                                                   in the past decades. Conventional computational fluid dynamics (CFD) methods, such as the finite volume method (FVM) and
                                                   the finite element method (FEM), have been successfully applied to simulate particulate flows [5–8]. Based on the mathematical
                                                   descriptions of particulate flows, two common strategies have been developed, i.e., the Euler-Euler and Euler-Lagrange strategies
                                                   [7–9]. For the Euler-Euler strategy, both the fluid and particles are described by continuous fields in the Eulerian frame. For
                                                   the Euler-Lagrange strategy, the fluid is described by continuous fields in the Eulerian frame, while the particles are described
                                                   by discrete points in the Lagrangian frame. The Euler-Euler and Euler-Lagrange strategies provide statistical information on
                                                   particulate flows. Due to their low computational cost, they can simulate device-scale systems but usually encounter closure
                                                   problems [9]. As a “first-principles” description of particulate flows, the particle-resolved direct numerical simulation (PR
                                                   DNS) strategy, which is the focus of this work, fully resolves the flow field around every particle and the coupled interaction
                                                   between fluid and particle. It can thus provide complete information on particulate flows at the price of a high computational cost.
                                                   The conventional CFD methods for the PR DNS of particulate flows can be grouped into those based on geometrically adapted


                                                   ∗ Corresponding author: rongzong.huang@csu.edu.cn
                                                                                                                                2

mesh [10] and those that employ a fixed Eulerian mesh, such as the immersed boundary (IB) method [11]. The regeneration of
geometrically adapted mesh as the particle moves is quite time-consuming, which worsens when many particles are involved
[12–14]. The methods that employ a fixed Eulerian mesh circumvent the time-consuming mesh regeneration, ensuring its
computational efficiency, but require special treatments to satisfy boundary conditions on the particle surface. Nevertheless, due
to the fully resolving nature of the PR DNS, the computational cost is always challenging when many particles are involved. As a
mesoscopic technique originating from the lattice gas automata, the lattice Boltzmann (LB) method shows many notable merits,
like simple algorithm, inherent parallelism, and easy boundary treatment [15, 16]. Thus, since its early development stage, the
LB method has been recognized as an efficient and powerful CFD method for the PR DNS of particulate flows [17–20]. A fixed
Eulerian mesh is used in the LB method for fluid flows, and various approaches have been proposed to achieve the PR DNS
[19–22].

  The pioneering work on the LB method for the PR DNS of particulate flows was done by Ladd [19, 20], which has evolved
into a fundamental framework for further development. This approach is based on the physical picture of the halfway bounce
back of the density distribution function in the LB method, implying that the solid particle’s surface is represented by a series
of points located at the middle position between two adjacent lattice nodes. A modified bounce-back scheme is proposed to
enforce the nonslip velocity condition at the moving surface of the solid particle. Meanwhile, based on the mesoscopic particle
interpretation of the density distribution function in the LB method (a unique interpretation inherited from the lattice gas au-
tomata), a momentum exchange scheme is proposed to calculate the hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid particle.
The zigzag approximation of the particle’s surface cannot well preserve the geometric integrity of curved surfaces. Thus, a finer
grid is required to satisfy accuracy in real simulations [23]. To overcome the drawback of the zigzag approximation, various
interpolation-based treatments have been proposed for curved surfaces [23–27], which can achieve second-order accuracy and
ensure a smoother force transition for the moving particle [13]. As a versatile method for fluid-structure interaction originally
proposed by Peskin [28], the IB method was first combined with the LB method to achieve the PR DNS of particulate flows by
Feng and Michaelides [22]. In the IB-LB method for particulate flows, the surface of the solid particle is represented and tracked
by a series of Lagrangian points, while the velocity field, both inside and outside the particle’s surface, is solved on a fixed
Eulerian mesh via the LB method. The nonslip velocity condition on the particle’s surface is handled by introducing a surface
force along it into the LB equation for velocity field. Then, the hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid particle can
be immediately obtained by integrating this surface force. Various schemes have been proposed to calculate the surface force to
achieve better numerical performance, mainly falling into the direct-forcing [29, 30] and feedback-forcing [22, 31] categories.
Based on the volumetric interpretation of the LB equation, Noble and Torczynski [21] proposed a so-called partially saturated
cells (PSC) approach for fluid-structure interaction. The local collision process of the LB equation, without considering the
general force term, is modified by introducing an artificial weighting function and an additional collision operator. This mod-
ified collision process can be reformulated into the standard collision process with a particular force term [32], and thus the
hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid particle can be directly calculated by summing up this particular force term
[32, 33]. The approach by Noble and Torczynski [21] fully inherits the merits of the standard LB method, and it has been widely
applied to explore dense particulate flows during the past decades [34–37].

  Most approaches in the LB method for the PR DNS of particulate flows are proposed for the isothermal situation, and the
extensions to thermal particulate flows, where the temperature field should be simultaneously resolved, remain quite limited and
essentially open-ended. Hu et al. [38] proposed interpolation-based treatments for the velocity and temperature conditions on
the moving curved boundary to handle particulate flows with thermal convection. Prediction and correction sub-steps, with an
                                                                                                                                     3

enforced iteration, are employed to enhance the numerical accuracy of the boundary condition treatments. Kang and Hassan
[39] extended the direct-forcing IB-LB method for the isothermal situation to thermal particulate flows. An energy source along
the particle’s surface is introduced to enforce the temperature condition there. Huang and Wu [40] interpreted the surface energy
source in the IB method as the latent heat of solid-liquid phase change. Then, they proposed an IB-LB method to simulate solid-
liquid phase change problems, where the solid phase is viewed as a solid particle with complex geometry. The unconstrained
melting in a circular cylinder is successfully simulated, and the result shows that the free motion of the solid phase can accelerate
the melting process. By considering the particle-particle and particle-wall interactions, Zhang et al. [41] successfully simulated
the sedimentations of many isothermal particles (185 and 504 particles) in the cold fluid via the IB-LB method. Similar to
the IB method for the velocity condition, several improvements [42, 43] have been recently proposed to enhance the numerical
performance of the IB method for the temperature condition.
  It is worth pointing out that the existing LB method for the PR DNS of thermal particulate flows is mainly limited to isothermal
particles with a fixed temperature, suggesting that the heat transfer and temperature field are not resolved inside the solid particle.
However, thermal particulate flows are typical conjugate heat transfer problems, where the heat transfer inside the solid particle
and fluid is coupled in reality. When the Biot number is finite (such as more significant than 0.1 or so), the heat transfer
inside the solid particle plays an essential role in the heat transfer process between the solid particle and fluid. Then, the heat
transfer and temperature field inside the solid particle should be fully resolved. Under this circumstance, the conjugate heat
transfer condition (i.e., the continuity of both the temperature and heat flux) will be encountered at the solid-fluid interface.
The temperature and heat flux at the solid-fluid interface are unknown in advance but are part of the solution. In this work, a
volumetric LB method is developed for the PR DNS of thermal particulate flows with conjugate heat transfer. This LB method
is devised as a single-domain approach, i.e., the velocity and temperature fields are uniformly solved over the entire domain,
implying that the merits of the standard LB method can be entirely inherited. The nonslip velocity condition in the solid domain
can be strictly ensured, and the hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid particle can be accurately calculated. A
specialized energy conservation equation is derived, whose form is carefully constructed to be uniformly solved over the entire
domain and to preserve the numerical fidelity in the presence of abrupt changes in thermophysical properties across the solid-
fluid interface. A corresponding LB equation is then devised to automatically satisfy the conjugate heat transfer condition and
correctly handle the differences in thermophysical properties. This LB equation is further analyzed theoretically to derive the
constraints to preserve the numerical fidelity near the solid-fluid interface at the discrete level. The remainder of this work is
organized as follows. The volumetric LB method is developed in Sec. II, numerical validations and discussions are carried out
in Sec. III, and a brief conclusion is drawn in Sec. IV.



                                     II.   VOLUMETRIC LATTICE BOLTZMANN METHOD


  The incompressible Newtonian fluid is considered, and both the viscous heat dissipation and compression work done by
pressure are neglected. The governing equations of the thermal fluid flows can be written as [44]

                                                           ∂ρ
                                                              + ∇ · (ρu) = 0,                                                     (1a)
                                                           ∂t
                                               ∂(ρu)
                                                      + ∇ · (ρuu) = −∇p + F + ∇ · Π,                                              (1b)
                                                 ∂t
                                                    ∂(ρϵ)
                                                          + ∇ · (ρϵu) = ∇ · (λ∇T ),                                               (1c)
                                                     ∂t
                                                                                                                                                    4



                                                      cell
                                                               ei          particle
                                                       node




FIG. 1. Illustration of the volumetric interpretation of the LB equation, where the point denotes the lattice node, the dashed line denotes the
lattice grid with the forming dashed box the lattice cell, the arrow denotes the lattice discrete velocity, and the elliptic denotes a solid particle.


where ρ is the density, u is the velocity, p is the pressure, F is the body force like gravity, Π is the Newtonian viscous stress, ϵ
is the internal energy, T is the temperature, and λ is the heat conductivity. Equation (1) can be solved by the well-established
double-distribution-function (DDF) LB method [44–46].
  For the thermal particulate flows, the solid particle is immersed in the fluid, and the thermophysical properties (such as the
density, specific heat, and heat conductivity) of the solid usually differ from those of the fluid. On the particle’s surface, the
nonslip velocity and conjugate heat transfer conditions are encountered [47]. In this work, a volumetric LB method is developed
for the PR DNS of thermal particulate flows with conjugate heat transfer. The volumetric interpretation of the LB equation is
applied [48], and thus the lattice node is located at the center of the lattice cell, as illustrated by Fig. 1. With this volumetric
interpretation, a solid fraction f s , defined as the volume percentage of the solid part within the lattice cell, is introduced here,
and the fluid, solid, and interface lattice cells are denoted by f s = 0, f s = 1, and 0 < f s < 1, respectively. Accordingly, the
solid particle can be represented by the solid fraction field. Under this scenario, the present volumetric LB method for thermal
particulate flows can be devised as a single-domain approach (i.e., all three kinds of lattice cells uniformly participate in the
computations without unique treatments), and it should degenerate into the conventional DDF LB method for thermal fluid
flows when f s = 0. The two-dimensional nine-velocity (D2Q9) discrete velocity set is considered in this work, and the extension
to the three-dimensional version is straightforward. The nine discrete velocities are given as [49]
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                       c (0, 0)T ,                                  i = 0,
                                      
                                      
                                ei = 
                                      
                                        c (cos[(i − 1)π/2], sin[(i − 1)π/2])T ,      i = 1, 2, 3, 4,                                              (2)
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                       √
                                       2c (cos[(2i − 1)π/4], sin[(2i − 1)π/4])T , i = 5, 6, 7, 8,
                                      
                                      
                                      

where c = δ x /δt is the lattice speed, δ x and δt are the lattice spacing and the time step, respectively.


                                                        A.    LB equation for velocity field


  As a single-domain approach, the present LB equation for velocity field is devised to be uniformly solved over the entire
domain, and the pivotal point is to ensure the nonslip velocity condition in the domain occupied by the solid particle, not only
at the solid-fluid interface but also within the solid particle. Solving the velocity field in the fluid domain requires only the
nonslip velocity condition at the solid-fluid interface. However, to uniformly solve the temperature field over the entire domain
                                                                                                                                           5

and automatically satisfy the conjugate heat transfer condition at the solid-fluid interface (see Sec. II B), as well as to precisely
calculate the hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid particle (see Sec. II C), the nonslip velocity condition within the
solid particle is also needed. For this purpose, the volumetric LB scheme, initially proposed for the solid-liquid phase change
[45], is extended to particulate flows here. The multiple-relaxation-time (MRT) LB equation for the density distribution function
fi (x, t) can be expressed as [45]
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                S
                                             m̄(x, t) = m(x, t) − S m(x, t) − m (x, t) + δt I −
                                                                                             eq
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                    Fm (x, t),                           (3a)
                                                                                                2
                                                                     fi∗ (x + ei δt , t + δt ) = f¯i (x, t),                             (3b)

where m = M ( f0 , f1 , · · · , f8 )T is the moment of the density distribution function with M the dimensionless orthogonal transfor-
mation matrix, I is the 9 × 9 unit matrix, the overbar “–” denotes the post-collision state, and the superscript “∗” means that the
nonslip velocity condition in the solid domain is not yet considered, which will be further discussed below. Equations (3a) and
(3b) are known as the local collision and linear streaming processes in the LB method, respectively, and the present collision
process for particulate flows remains identical to the conventional one for fluid flows. For the D2Q9 discrete velocity set, the
dimensionless orthogonal transformation matrix M can be chosen as [50, 51]
                                                                                                          
                                                1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
                                                                                                        
                                                     −4 −1 −1 −1 −1 2 2 2 2 
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                          
                                                          4 −2 −2 −2 −2 1 1 1 1 
                                                                                                          
                                                                0 1 0 −1 0 1 −1 −1 1 
                                                                                                            

                                        M =  0 −2 0 2 0 1 −1 −1 1  .
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                          (4)
                                                                                                             
                                                                      0 0 1 0 −1 1 1 −1 −1
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                               
                                                                            0 0 −2 0 2 1 1 −1 −1
                                                                                                               
                                                                                0 1 −1 1 −1 0 0 0 0 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                      0 0 0 0 0 1 −1 1 −1

The diagonal relaxation matrix S in the moment space is given as [51]

                                                             S = diag(s0 , se , sε , s j , sq , s j , sq , s p , s p ).                   (5)

                                                              eq T
                                           eq eq                        eq
The equilibrium moment, defined as meq = M f0 , f1 , · · · , f8    with fi the equilibrium density distribution function, is given
as [51]
                                    h                                                                                          iT
                               meq = ρ, −2ρ + 3ρ|û|2 , ρ − 3ρ|û|2 , ρû x , −ρû x , ρûy , −ρûy , ρ û2x − û2y , ρû x ûy ,
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                          (6)

where û = (û x , ûy )T = u/c with u the macroscopic velocity. The discrete force term Fm in the moment space is given as [52, 53]
                                    h                                                                                               iT
                                Fm = 0, 6F̂ · û, −6F̂ · û, F̂ x , −F̂ x , F̂y , −F̂y , 2 F̂ x û x − F̂y ûy , F̂ x ûy + F̂y û x ,
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                          (7)

where F̂ = (F̂ x , F̂y )T = F/c with F the body force (such as gravity or buoyancy). Note that there is no need to restrict c = 1 for
the present MRT LB equation as the rescaled moment is adopted [50].
   The density distribution function fi∗ (x, t + δt ) evolved according to the LB equation [i.e., Eq. (3)] is temporary without con-
sidering the nonslip velocity condition in the solid domain. Based on the volumetric interpretation (see Fig. 1), each lattice cell
consists of fluid and solid fractions. For the fluid fraction 1 − f s (x, t + δt ), the density distribution function is the temporal one
                                                                                                                                           6

given by Eq. (3). In contrast, for the solid fraction f s (x, t + δt ), the density distribution function is assumed to be at the equilib-
rium state [45]. Therefore, the desired density distribution function fi (x, t + δt ) can be locally obtained by linear interpolation as
follows:

                                                                                 eq
                                                      fi = (1 − f s ) fi∗ + f s fi (ρ, u s ),                                            (8)

where ρ(x, t + δt ) is the density given by ρ =       i=0 fi , u s (x, t + δt ) is the velocity of the solid fraction determined by the rigid
                                                  P8        ∗

body motion of the solid particle [see Eq. (27)], and the solid fraction f s (x, t + δt ) is directly determined by the position of the
solid particle, which is updated via particle dynamics in Sec. II C. With the desired density distribution function fi (x, t + δt ), the
macroscopic density ρ(x, t + δt ) and velocity u(x, t + δt ) can be uniformly calculated over the entire domain as
                                                       8                      8
                                                       X                      X               δt
                                                  ρ=           fi ,    ρu =         ei fi +      F.                                      (9)
                                                         i=0                  i=0
                                                                                              2

Based on Eqs. (8) and (9), there is ρ =       i=0 fi =
                                            P8            P8         ∗
                                                               i=0 fi , implying that the local mass conservation can be strictly satisfied.

Meanwhile, for the solid cell with f s = 1, there is u = u s , implying that the nonslip velocity condition in the solid domain is
strictly ensured. For the fluid cell with f s = 0, Eqs. (8) and (9), together with Eq. (3), precisely degenerate into the standard LB
method for fluid flows. Consequently, the kinematic and bulk viscosities of the fluid are recovered as ν = c2s δt (s−1   p − 0.5) and
                                                                                                    √
ς = c s δt (se − 0.5), respectively, and the pressure is determined by p = ρc s [51]. Here, c s = c/ 3 is the lattice sound speed, and
     2       −1                                                              2

the dimensionless relaxation time for the density distribution function can be defined as τ f = 1/s p . Furthermore, as can be seen
from Eqs. (3), (8), and (9), the nonslip velocity condition in the solid domain is implemented by modifying the linear streaming
process while keeping the local collision process unchanged. Therefore, the present LB equation for velocity field for particulate
flows is expected to apply when the fluid itself is subjected to body force, considering the force term is implemented by the
local collision process [see Eq. (3a)]. Numerical tests will be carried out to demonstrate this point in Sec. III B. Consequently,
the present LB equation for velocity field is capable of handling thermal particulate flows where buoyancy, at least, should be
considered. Before proceeding further, it is worth pointing out that the solid and interface lattice cells with f s > 0 participate
in all the computations (including the collision and streaming processes) just as the fluid lattice cell with f s = 0. Therefore, the
solid fraction of these lattice cells can be interpreted as being filled with numerical fluid, which does not take effect in solving
the velocity field but should be seriously considered in calculating the hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid particle
(see Sec. II C).



                                                 B.    LB equation for temperature field


  For the PR DNS of thermal particulate flows with conjugate heat transfer, both the temperature fields in the fluid and solid
domains should be fully resolved, and the conjugate heat transfer condition at the solid-fluid interface (i.e., the continuity of
both the temperature and heat flux) should be strictly satisfied. Since the nonslip velocity condition in the solid domain can
be enforced by the above LB equation for velocity field, the energy conservation equation [i.e., Eq. (1c)] can then be directly
solved over the entire domain, and the conjugate heat transfer condition at the solid-fluid interface can be automatically satisfied
without any additional treatment. Under this scenario, the internal energy in Eq. (1c) is uniformly expressed as ϵ = cv T , where
the specific heat cv denotes cv, f in the fluid domain and cv,s in the solid domain. This work focuses on incompressible flows,
implying that the fluid density ρ keeps constant and the velocity field is divergence-free (i.e., ∇ · u = 0) from the fluid mechanics
                                                                                                                                         7

perspective. It is worth noting that the mass conservation equation recovered by the LB equation in Sec. II A via the Chapman-
Enskog analysis is ∂ρ ∂t + ∇ · (ρu) = 0. However, this LB equation also requires the common low Mach number assumption
                       

in the LB method, implying it is only suitable for low-speed flows with neglectable density variation. Since the solid is also
incompressible, the density ρ and specific heat cv remain constant in both the fluid and solid domains, respectively. Therefore,
Eq. (1c) can be rewritten as
                                                                                   
                                                       ∂ϵ                    λ
                                                          + ∇ · (ϵu) = ∇ ·  ∇T  ,
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                     (10)
                                                       ∂t                       ρf
                                                                              

where ρ f denotes the exact density of the fluid, and the internal energy can still be uniformly expressed as ϵ = cv T , with cv
being cv, f in the fluid domain but ρ s cv,s /ρ f in the solid domain. Here, ρ s denotes the exact density of the solid, and ρ s cv,s /ρ f
can be viewed as a pseudo specific heat of the solid. To simplify the notation, the exact specific heat of the solid will not be
referred to, and the pseudo specific heat of the solid ρ s cv,s /ρ f is denoted by the solid specific heat cv,s in the following. Such a
mathematical treatment does not introduce any limitations in real applications. With the present volumetric interpretation (see
Fig. 1), the specific heat cv and heat conductivity λ in Eq. (10) can be uniformly expressed as

                                                         cv = (1 − f s )cv, f + f s cv,s ,                                          (11a)

                                                          λ = (1 − f s )λ f + f s λ s ,                                             (11b)

where λ f and λ s denote the heat conductivities of the fluid and solid, respectively. In real applications, the thermophysical
properties of the solid could differ from those of the fluid, implying that both cv and λ in Eq. (10) could abruptly change across
the solid-fluid interface. These abrupt changes pose a significant challenge to the numerical fidelity of modeling and simulation
in the framework of the single-domain approach.
  Equation (10) can be directly solved by the total enthalpy-based LB method for solid-liquid phase change by neglecting
the latent enthalpy [45, 50]. For conjugate heat transfer problems where the solid is stationary, the specific heat cv and heat
conductivity λ in Eq. (10) only vary with space but not time and satisfying numerical results can be obtained (see Huang and
Wu [50] for details). However, for the thermal particulate flows focused in this work, the solid particle moves with the fluid,
leading to cv and λ in Eq. (10) steeply varying with both space and time, and a significant numerical error will be induced by
the steep variation of cv near the solid-fluid interface based on our numerical tests. To circumvent such numerical difficulty, we
reformulate the convection term in Eq. (10) as follows:

                               ∇ · (ϵu) ≡ ∇ · (cv T u) = cv u · ∇T + T ∇ · (cv u)
                                                                           n                             o
                                                       = cv u · ∇T + T ∇ · [(1 − f s )cv, f + f s cv,s ]u                            (12)

                                                        = cv u · ∇T + (cv,s − cv, f )T ∇ · ( f s u) + cv, f T ∇ · u.
In the fluid domain, the divergence of the velocity vanishes from the fluid mechanics perspective as this work focuses on
incompressible flows. In the solid domain, the velocity field satisfies the rigid body motion of the solid particle, implying that
the divergence of the velocity also vanishes. Therefore, there is ∇ · u = 0 over the entire domain, and thus the last term cv, f T ∇ · u
in Eq. (12) can be uniformly neglected. To simplify the second term (cv,s − cv, f )T ∇ · ( f s u) in Eq. (12), a governing equation for
the solid fraction f s should first be established. For this purpose, an arbitrary material element Ω(t) is considered here, and the
total solid fraction within Ω(t) can be expressed as Ω(t) f s dV. In reality, the solid-fluid interface always remains sharp rather
                                                        R
                                                                                  R
than diffuses as the solid particle moves, implying that the total solid fraction Ω(t) f s dV should remain constant, i.e., there is
                                                              Z
                                                           D
                                                                   f s dV = 0,                                                      (13)
                                                           Dt Ω(t)
                                                                                                                                        8

where D/Dt = ∂/∂t + u · ∇ represents the material derivative. From the fluid mechanics perspective, the velocity divergence can
be interpreted as the relative volume expansion rate of an infinitesimal element, i.e., there is ∇ · u = [D(dV)/Dt] dV. Using this
                                                                                                                   

relation, the left-hand side of Eq. (13) can be formulated as
                                        Z             Z                Z
                                     D                      D fs                   D(dV)
                                             f s dV =            dV +           fs
                                     Dt Ω(t)           Ω(t) Dt           Ω(t)       Dt
                                                            ∂ fs
                                                      Z                       !       Z
                                                    =             + u · ∇ f s dV +          f s (∇ · u)dV                            (14)
                                                       Ω(t) ∂t                         Ω(t)
                                                            ∂ fs
                                                      Z "                       #
                                                    =             + ∇ · ( f s u) dV.
                                                       Ω(t) ∂t

Substituting this expression into Eq. (13) and considering the arbitrariness of the material element Ω(t), Eq. (13) immediately
leads to

                                                              ∂ fs
                                                                   + ∇ · ( f s u) = 0,                                               (15)
                                                              ∂t

which suggests that the solid fraction f s can be viewed as a scalar variable transported with the fluid and governed by a pure
convection equation. With this governing equation for f s , the second term (cv,s − cv, f )T ∇ · ( f s u) in Eq. (12) can be simplified as
−(cv,s −cv, f )T ∂ f s ∂t. Based on the above discussions, the energy conservation equation [i.e., Eq. (10)] can finally be reformulated
                      

as
                                                             
                                            ∂ϵ         λ                                    ∂ fs
                                               = ∇ ·  ∇T  − cv u · ∇T + (cv,s − cv, f )T      ,
                                                              
                                                                                                                                     (16)
                                            ∂t            ρf                                   ∂t
                                                        


which can be viewed as a pure diffusion equation with a source term qc = −cv u · ∇T + (cv,s − cv, f )T ∂ f s ∂t. Here, it is worth
                                                                                                            

emphasizing that the governing equation for f s [i.e., Eq. (15)] is only used to simplify the second term in Eq. (12). In real
simulations, the solid fraction f s is directly determined by the position of the solid particle, and then the time derivative ∂ f s ∂t
                                                                                                                                    

can be calculated, which will be further discussed. Here, it is worth pointing out that the low Mach number assumption in the LB
method implies that the moving velocity of the solid particle is rather small compared with the lattice speed c = δ x δt , suggesting
                                                                                                                     

that the solid particle won’t jump a couple of lattices during one time step. Such a scenario ensures the calculating accuracy of
∂ f s ∂t at each lattice cell.
     

     To solve Eq. (16) via the LB method, a distribution function for ϵ, i.e., the internal energy distribution function gi (x, t), is
introduced here. The MRT LB equation for gi (x, t) can be expressed as
                                                                                           !
                                                                                         R
                                      n̄(x, t) = n(x, t) − R n(x, t) − n (x, t) + δt I −
                                                                             eq
                                                                              
                                                                                             q (x, t),                              (17a)
                                                                                         2 m
                                                         gi (x + ei δt , t + δt ) = ḡi (x, t),                                     (17b)

where n = M(g0 , g1 , · · · , g8 )T is the moment of the internal energy distribution function, and R is the diagonal relaxation matrix
in the moment space which is given as

                                               R = diag(σ0 , σe , σε , σ j , σq , σ j , σq , σe , σe ).                              (18)

                                                                                                       eq T
                                                                                    eq eq                       eq
Following the work by Huang and Wu [50], the equilibrium moment, defined as neq = M g0 , g1 , · · · , g8    with gi the
equilibrium distribution function for the internal energy, is devised as

                              neq = ϵ, −4ϵ + (4 + α1 )cv,ref T, 4ϵ − (4 − α2 )cv,ref T, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 T ,
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                     (19)
                                                                                                                                          9

where α1 and α2 are free parameters, and cv,ref is a reference specific heat introduced to correctly handle the differences in
thermophysical properties between the fluid and solid. The value of cv,ref can be arbitrarily chosen but should be constant over
the entire domain [50]. Without loss of generality, it is set to the harmonic mean of the fluid and solid specific heats, i.e.,
cv,ref = 2cv, f cv,s (cv, f + cv,s ), throughout this work. The discrete source term qm in the moment space is given as [54]
                    


                                              qm = qc , β1 qc , β2 qc , 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 T ,
                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                       (20)

where β1 should be fixed at −4 to eliminate the significant numerical error induced by the steep variation of cv near the solid-fluid
interface (see Appendix A), and β2 is a free parameter. The macroscopic internal energy ϵ(x, t + δt ) is defined as
                                                                 8
                                                                 X            δt
                                                            ϵ=         gi +      q,                                                    (21)
                                                                 i=0
                                                                              2 c

and then the temperature T (x, t + δt ) can be obtained via the thermodynamic relation T = ϵ/cv . Through the Chapman-Enskog
analysis, the targeted energy conservation equation [i.e., Eq. (16)] can be correctly recovered, where the heat conductivity
satisfies
                                                   λ    4 + α1                     
                                                      =                      j − 0.5 .
                                                               cv,ref c2 δt σ−1                                                        (22)
                                                   ρf     6

Here, the dimensionless relaxation time for the internal energy distribution function can be defined as τg = 1/σ j . In real
simulations, the above free parameters α1 , α2 , and β2 can be adjusted to achieve better numerical stability and accuracy, and they
are set to α1 = −2, α2 = 1, and β2 = 4, respectively, in this work.
  Before proceeding further, some discussion on computing the convection term in the form of a source term, i.e., the qc =
−cv u · ∇T + (cv,s − cv, f )T ∂ f s ∂t in Eq. (16), is useful. Since the thermal particulate flows with conjugate heat transfer are usually
                                   

transient problems, it is necessary to ensure that the source term qc is also at position x and time t + δt when computing the
macroscopic variables ϵ(x, t + δt ) and T (x, t + δt ) at the next time step [see Eq. (21)]. For this purpose, the temperature gradient
∇T at position x and time t + δt , denoted by ∇T (x, t + δt ), is computed by the following local scheme
                                                 

                                                                                 i=0 ei gi (x, t + δt )
                                                                                P8
                                                                 6       1
                                         ∇T (x, t + δt ) = −                                            ,
                                         
                                                                                                                                   (23)
                                                               4 + α1 cv,ref δt    τg (x, t + δt )
which is derived from the Chapman-Enskog analysis and widely accepted in the LB method [54]. Here, gi (x, t +δt ) is determined
by the LB equation, and τg (x, t + δt ) is determined by Eq. (22). The time derivative of the solid fraction ∂ f s ∂t at position x and
                                                                                                                         

time t + δt , denoted by ∂ f s ∂t (x, t + δt ), is computed as follows:
                              

                                         ∂f                     f s (x, t + δt ) − f s (x, t)  ∂ f s 
                                              s
                                                 (x, t + δt ) = 2                              −          (x, t),                       (24)
                                           ∂t                                  δt                 ∂t
where f s (x, t + δt ) is determined by the rigid body motion of the solid particle, and f s (x, t + δt ) − f s (x, t) δt can be interpreted
                                                                                                                     

as a central difference for ∂ f s ∂t at position x and time t + δt /2. Therefore, Eq. (24) integrates the central difference and linear
                                  

extrapolation schemes, which helps to preserve the numerical fidelity near the solid-fluid interface (see Appendix A). Here, it
is worth emphasizing that ∂ f s ∂t (x, t + δt ) cannot be simply computed by the backward difference f s (x, t + δt ) − f s (x, t) δt .
                                                                                                                              

Otherwise, a significant numerical error will inevitably be introduced near the solid-fluid interface. Note that T (x, t + δt ) is also
involved in qc (x, t + δt ). Therefore, T (x, t + δt ) should be first solved from Eq. (21) as follows:
                                                               P8           δt
                                                                  i=0 gi − 2 cv u · ∇T
                                                         T=                                ,                                          (25)
                                                             cv − δ2t (cv,s − cv, f )∂ f s ∂t
and then ϵ(x, t + δt ) and qc (x, t + δt ) can be immediately obtained.
                                                                                                                                 10

                                                          C.    Particle dynamics


  The governing equations of the solid particle motion can be written as [55]
                                                                    dUc
                                                                M       = Fc ,                                                 (26a)
                                                                     dt
                                                          dΩc
                                                     Ic       + Ωc × (Ic Ωc ) = Tc ,                                           (26b)
                                                           dt
where M is the mass of the solid particle, Ic is the inertia matrix of the solid particle with respect to its mass center, Uc is the
velocity of the mass center, Ωc is the angular velocity around the mass center, Fc is the total force acting on the solid particle,
and Tc is the total torque acting on the solid particle with respect to its mass center. Based on the rigid body motion of the solid
particle, the velocity of the solid fraction at lattice cell x and time t can be immediately obtained

                                                u s (x, t) = Uc (t) + Ωc (t) × [x − Xc (t)],                                    (27)

where Xc denotes the mass center of the solid particle. Note that the solid particle is represented by a solid fraction field in
the present volumetric LB method, meaning that the solid-fluid interface is smeared over one lattice cell rather than kept sharp.
Under this scenario, the velocity of the solid fraction u s at the solid/interface lattice cell x is always determined by the above
equation, regardless of whether position x falls within the particle’s sharp interface in reality. Such a simple strategy could be
inaccurate from the viewpoint of a sharp interface but acceptable once the sharp interface is smeared over one lattice cell.
  The key point to numerically solve Eq. (26) is determining the hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid particle.
On the basis of Eq. (8), a specialized momentum exchange scheme can be formulated to calculate the hydrodynamic force and
torque
                                          δD X X                     δD X X  eq
                                FMES = − x         ( fi − fi∗ )ei = − x           fi (ρ,u s ) − fi∗ ei ,
                                                                                                   
                                                                           fs                                                  (28a)
                                          δt x i                     δt x     i
                                δDx X            X                   δ DX                 X
                                                                                                eq
                       TMES = −       (x − Xc ) × ( fi − fi∗ )ei = − x                        fi (ρ,u s ) − fi∗ ei ,
                                                                                                               
                                                                          (x − Xc ) × f s                                      (28b)
                                δt x             i
                                                                     δt x                 i

where D is the dimension of space, and the summation with respect to x is performed for each particle. Since the present LB
equation for velocity field is uniformly solved over the entire domain, the solid domain is numerically filled with the fluid in
the simulation. Therefore, the hydrodynamic force and torque calculated by the above momentum exchange scheme come from
the fluids inside and outside the solid particle. In reality, the hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid particle should
be merely from the outside fluid. As discussed in Sec. II A, the nonslip velocity condition in the solid domain can be strictly
satisfied by the present volumetric LB method, implying that the numerical fluid inside the solid particle can be viewed as a
pseudo rigid body associated with the solid particle. The dynamics of this pseudo rigid body are also described by Eq. (26), and
thus the force and torque acting on the solid particle from the inside fluid can be precisely expressed as
                                                                            dUc
                                                               Fin = −Min       ,                                              (29a)
                                                                             dt
                                                                 dΩc
                                                  Tin = −Ic,in       − Ωc × (Ic,in Ωc ),                                       (29b)
                                                                  dt
where Min = ρ f M/ρ s and Ic,in = ρ f Ic /ρ s are the mass and inertia matrix of the inside fluid. The exact hydrodynamic force and
torque acting on the solid particle can then be calculated by

                                                            Fout = FMES − Fin ,                                                (30a)

                                                            Tout = TMES − Tin .                                                (30b)
                                                                                                                                           11

In real applications, the total force Fc in Eq. (26a) could consist of the hydrodynamic force Fout and the other body force like
gravity or buoyancy, while the total torque Tc in Eq. (26b) is equal to the hydrodynamic torque Tout as the other body force
usually does not yield any torque with respect to the mass center. Note that once the solid particle collides with each other or
with the wall, an additional repulsive force and torque should be introduced, and the collision model proposed by Glowinski
et al. [56] is adopted in this work. The reader is referred to previous works [22, 56, 57] for more details.
                                                                                                                           
  In the simulations, Fin and Tin are explicitly calculated via Eq. (29) with backward difference approximations for dUc dt and
    
dΩc dt, and then the governing equations of the solid particle motion [i.e., Eq. (26)] are solved by the forward Euler method. As
discussed by Suzuki and Inamuro [58] for the IB method, these explicit calculations of Fin and Tin won’t introduce an additional
restriction on the density ratio ρ s /ρ f for numerical stability.



                                                III.    VALIDATIONS AND DISCUSSIONS


  In this section, numerical tests are carried out to validate the present volumetric LB method for the PR DNS of thermal
particulate flows with conjugate heat transfer. First, the transient conjugate heat transfer is considered to validate the present
energy conservation equation [i.e., Eq. (16)] and the corresponding LB equation for temperature field. Then, the isothermal
sedimentation of an elliptical particle, where many numerical results are available for comparison, is simulated to validate the
LB equation for velocity field and the computation of the hydrodynamic force and torque. Afterward, the sedimentation of a cold
particle with a fixed temperature is considered to demonstrate the capability of the present volumetric LB method for thermal
particulate flows. Finally, the present method is applied to study particle sedimentations with conjugate heat transfer. In the
simulations, the differences in thermophysical properties between the fluid and solid are characterized by the heat conductivity
ratio Rλ = λ s /λ f and the specific heat ratio Rcv = cv,s /cv, f , where the specific heat of the fluid is fixed at cv, f = 1. The relaxation
parameters in S for the velocity field are set as s0 = s j = 1, sε = se = 1.25, s p = 1/τ f , and s−1     p − 0.5 sq − 0.5 = 1/12. The
                                                                                                                    −1         

relaxation parameters in R for the temperature field are set as σ0 = 1, σε = σe , σq = σ j , σ j = 1/τg , and σ−1        j − 0.5 σe − 0.5 =
                                                                                                                                 −1       

1/4 unless otherwise stated. Here, the dimensionless relaxation times τ f and τg are determined by the kinematic viscosity ν and
heat conductivity λ, respectively.



                                                   A.    Transient conjugate heat transfer


  To validate the present energy conservation equation [i.e., Eq. (16)] and the corresponding LB equation for temperature field,
the transient conjugate heat transfer is simulated. First, the one-dimensional case, where the analytical solution can be derived,
is considered. As illustrated by Fig. 2, the solid and fluid move right with constant velocity (U, 0)T . At time t = 0, the solid and
fluid are in the domains x < 0 and x > 0, respectively, and the solid-fluid interface is located at x = 0. The temperature of the
solid and fluid are fixed at T h and T c (T h > T c ), respectively. As time goes on, the solid is cooled by the fluid, and the conjugate
heat transfer condition is encountered at the solid-fluid interface. The analytical solution for this one-dimensional conjugate heat
transfer problem is
                                           
                                                                     1            X − x
                                                                                      i
                                                + (T   −     )               erfc            ,   x < Xi (solid),
                                           
                                           
                                           T h      c   T h                          √
                                                                         +              αs t
                                                              p
                                           
                                           
                                                                R λ Rcv
                                                                           1        2
                                T (x, t) = 
                                           
                                                                                                                                         (31)
                                                                p
                                           
                                                                  Rλ Rcv          x−X 
                                                                                           i
                                                +                                            ,   x > Xi (fluid),
                                           
                                           
                                           T c   (T h − T c )               erfc     √
                                                                 Rλ Rcv + 1        2 αf t
                                           
                                           
                                                              p
                                                                                                                                                 12


                                                                             U

                                                          solid      interface       fluid
                                            T(x,0)=Th                                        T(x,0)=Tc

                                                                       O         x

FIG. 2. Schematic of the one-dimensional transient conjugate heat transfer with the coordinate, velocity, and initial condition shown. The
solid-fluid interface is located at the halfway point between two adjacent lattice nodes at time t = 0.




FIG. 3. Temperature distribution near the solid-fluid interface at time t = 2 × 103 for (a) Rλ = 1 and (b) Rλ = 4 in the stationary situation of the
one-dimensional transient conjugate heat transfer. The symbols denote the numerical results and the solid lines denote the analytical solutions.


where α s = λ s /(ρ f cv,s ) and α f = λ f /(ρ f cv, f ) are the exact thermal diffusivities of the solid and fluid, respectively, Xi = Ut is the
                                                                  R +∞ 2
location of the solid-fluid interface, and erfc(x) = √2π x e−η dη is the complementary error function.
  In the simulations, the lattice spacing and time step are set to δ x = 1 and δt = 1, respectively. The initial temperature of the
solid and fluid are fixed at T h = 1 and T c = 0, respectively. The density and heat conductivity of the fluid are set to ρ f = 1 and
λ f = 0.1, respectively. Note that only the LB equation for temperature field is involved here as the velocity field is specified
in advance. The stationary situation with U = 0 is first considered, for which the source term qc in Eq. (16) vanishes because
u = 0 and ∂ f s ∂t = 0 over the entire domain. Figure 3 shows the temperature distribution near the solid-fluid interface at time
               

t = 2 × 103 and compares the numerical result with the analytical solution. The heat conductivity ratio is chosen as Rλ = 1 and
4, and the specific heat ratio is chosen as Rcv = 4−1 , 40 , and 41 . Good agreement between the numerical result and the analytical
solution can be observed in Fig. 3, which demonstrates that the conjugate heat transfer problem in the stationary situation can be
correctly described by the present energy conservation equation [i.e., Eq. (16)] and accurately solved by the present LB equation
for temperature field [i.e., Eq. (17)].
  To activate the source term qc in Eq. (16), the moving situation with U = 0.05 is then considered. As the solid-fluid interface
moves, the solid fraction and the thermophysical properties vary with space and time near the solid-fluid interface. Figure
4 shows the comparisons of the temperature distribution near the solid-fluid interface between the numerical result and the
analytical solution. The heat conductivity ratio is Rλ = 1 and 4, and the specific heat ratio is Rcv = 4−1 , 40 , and 41 . The chosen
time is also t = 2 × 103 , and thus the solid-fluid interface moves to the position Xi = 100. It can be seen from Fig. 4 that the
numerical result is in good agreement with the analytical solution, even at the lattice nodes just close to the solid-fluid interface.
Such a good agreement demonstrates the applicability of the present energy conservation equation and the corresponding LB
                                                                                                                                                13




FIG. 4. Temperature distribution near the solid-fluid interface at time t = 2 × 103 for (a) Rλ = 1 and (b) Rλ = 4 in the moving situation of the
one-dimensional transient conjugate heat transfer. The symbols denote the numerical results and the solid lines denote the analytical solutions.




FIG. 5. Radial temperature distribution near the solid-fluid interface at time t = 2 × 103 for (a) Rλ = 1 and (b) Rλ = 4 in the moving situation of
the two-dimensional transient conjugate heat transfer. The symbols denote the numerical results by the present LB method and the solid lines
denote the benchmark solutions by the conventional FEM.




equation.

  Then, the transient cooling of a solid circular cylinder by the fluid in the external infinite domain, as a two-dimensional case,
is considered. The setups of this two-dimensional case remain the same as the above one-dimensional case, except for the
geometric configuration. The origin of the reference frame is fixed at the initial center of the cylinder, and the diameter of the
cylinder is set to D = 64δ x . The solid-fluid system moves right with constant velocity (0.05, 0)T to activate the source term qc
in Eq. (16). Based on the Galilean invariance, it is immediately known that the radial temperature distribution for this moving
situation should be the same as that for the stationary situation, which is obtained using the conventional FEM here and serves as
the benchmark solution for validation. Figure 5 compares the numerical results by the present LB method with the benchmark
solutions by the conventional FEM, where the time is chosen as t = 2 × 103 , and thus the rightmost position of the solid-fluid
interface moves to Xi = 100. Good agreement, even at the lattice nodes just close to the solid-fluid interface, can also be observed
in Fig. 5, which reconfirms the applicability of the present energy conservation equation and the corresponding LB equation.
                                                                                                                                         14




                                                                          a      q
                                                                y
                                                         O
                                                                          b
                                                         x
                                                                                           H

                                                                 g




                                                                         L

FIG. 6. Schematic of the isothermal sedimentation of an elliptical particle in a long channel with the coordinate, gravity acceleration, and
geometric parameters shown. The initial position of the mass center of the elliptical particle is set to (0, 0.5L)T .



                                            B.   Isothermal sedimentation of an elliptical particle


  To validate the LB equation for velocity field and the computation of the hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid
particle, the isothermal sedimentation of an elliptical particle in a long channel, where many numerical results are available
for comparison, is considered. Compared with the circular particle, simulating the sedimentation of the elliptical particle is
relatively more sensitive to the computational accuracy of the hydrodynamic force and torque. As illustrated by Fig. 6, the
major and minor axes of the elliptical particle are a = 0.05 cm and b = 0.025 cm, respectively, and the width of the channel is
L = 0.4 cm. The densities of the solid and fluid are ρ s = 1.1 g/cm3 and ρ f = 1.0 g/cm3 , respectively. The kinematic viscosity of
the fluid is ν = 0.01 cm2 /s, and the gravity acceleration is |g| = 980 cm/s2 . Since the solid density is larger than the fluid density,
the elliptical particle settles down due to gravity.
  In the simulations, the channel width is divided into 104 lattice cells, implying that the lattice spacing is δ x = 1/260 cm.
To mimic the long channel, the height of the computational domain is chosen as H = 30L, and the no-flow condition with
u = 0 and the fully developed condition with ∂u/∂x = 0 are imposed at the upper and lower sides of the computational domain,
respectively. The dimensionless relaxation time for the density distribution function is set to τ f = 0.6, and then the time step
can be determined via the relation ν = c2s δt s−1
                                               p − 0.5 . At time t = 0, the velocity field is initialized as u = 0 over the entire
                                                      

domain, and the elliptical particle is placed in the middle of the channel and 3L away from the upper side of the computational
domain. The orientation of the particle, i.e., the angle between its major axis and the horizontal (the y coordinate shown in Fig.
6), is initialized as θ = π/4. Then, the elliptical particle starts settling down in the channel. Note that only the LB equation for
velocity field is involved here because the sedimentation process is isothermal. In practice, a net body force (ρ s − ρ f )g can be
applied to the solid particle, and then the fluid is free of any body force. The particle trajectory (y/L versus x/L) and orientation
(θ/π versus x/L) in the sedimentation process are plotted in Fig. 7 and compared with previous results by the conventional FEM.
Here, (x, y)T denotes the location of the mass center of the elliptical particle. Good agreement between the present results with
the previous FEM results can be observed, demonstrating the applicability of the present LB equation for velocity field and
the computational accuracy of the hydrodynamic force and torque. It can also be seen from Fig. 7 that, at the initial stage, the
elliptical particle swings towards the left wall, accompanied by a counterclockwise rotation around its mass center. As time goes
on, the elliptical particle tends to settle down along the channel’s centerline, with its orientation tending to zero.
                                                                                                                                              15




FIG. 7. Comparisons of (a) the particle trajectory (y/L versus x/L) and (b) the particle orientation (θ/π versus x/L) between the present results
and the previous FEM results by Xia et al. [59].




FIG. 8. Comparisons of (a) the particle trajectory (y/L versus x/L) and (b) the particle orientation (θ/π versus x/L) between the situations
when the fluid is free of any body force (situation I) and when the fluid is subjected to gravity (situation II).



  Before proceeding further, it is necessary to validate that the present LB equation for velocity field and the computation of
the hydrodynamic force and torque apply to the situation when the fluid itself is subjected to body force. For this purpose, the
above simulation is repeated by directly applying the gravity forces ρ s g and ρ f g to the solid and fluid, respectively. It is worth
pointing out that a pressure gradient will be induced inside the fluid by the gravity force, which should be carefully considered in
the initialization and boundary condition treatment of the simulation. Furthermore, this pressure gradient will lead to a density
gradient as the pressure is determined by p = ρc2s in the LB method. Thus, to well approximate the incompressible condition
of the fluid, the dimensionless relaxation time τ f is changed from 0.6 to 0.515 to increase the lattice sound speed c s and then
suppress the density variation caused by the pressure gradient. Figure 8 shows the particle trajectory (y/L versus x/L) and
orientation (θ/π versus x/L) in the sedimentation process and compares the results with these for the situation when the fluid
is free of any body force, which is simulated again with τ f = 0.515 for the sake of comparison. As expected, there is no
distinguishable difference between the numerical results for the situations when the fluid is free of any body force and when
the fluid is subjected to gravity. Therefore, the present LB equation for velocity field and the computation of the hydrodynamic
force and torque apply when the fluid is subjected to body force and thus is capable of handling thermal particulate flows where
buoyancy should be considered.
                                                                                                                                            16



                                                             Th         Tc              Th
                                                                  x
                                                         O
                                                                        D
                                                         y
                                                                                               H

                                                                  g




                                                                             L

FIG. 9. Schematic of the sedimentation of a cold particle with fixed temperature in a long channel, where the coordinate, gravity acceleration,
and geometric parameters are given. The initial position of the mass center of the circular particle is set to (1.5D, 0)T .


                                        C.    Sedimentation of a cold particle with fixed temperature


  To demonstrate the capability of the present volumetric LB method for thermal particulate flows, the sedimentation of a cold
particle with fixed temperature in a long channel is simulated in this section. Since the temperature of the solid particle is
assumed to be constant, neither the heat transfer inside the solid particle nor the conjugate heat transfer condition at the solid-
fluid interface is involved. Thus, this sedimentation process is only affected by the density but not the other thermophysical
properties of the solid particle. As shown in Fig. 9, the width of the long channel is L = 4D with D the diameter of the circular
particle. At time t = 0, the temperatures of the solid particle and fluid are uniformly set to T c and T h (T c < T h ), respectively, and
the particle center deviates from the channel’s centerline with a distance of D/2. In the sedimentation process, the temperatures
of the solid particle and the channel walls are kept at T c and T h , respectively. A net body force (ρ s − ρ f )g is applied to the solid
particle, and the buoyancy force −ρ f gβ(T − T ref ) is applied to the fluid, where the reference temperature T ref is set to T h . Four
dimensionless parameters: the density ratio ρr , the Reynolds number Re, the Prandtl number Pr, and the Grashof number Gr,
can be introduced to characterize this sedimentation process, which are defined as

                                             ρs              Uref D              ν            |g|β(T h − T c )D3
                                      ρr =      ,   Re =            ,    Pr =      ,   Gr =                      .                        (32)
                                             ρf                ν                 α                    ν2

Here, Uref =    (ρr − 1)|g|πD/2 is a reference velocity with g the gravity acceleration, and ν, α, and β are the kinematic viscosity,
               p

thermal diffusivity, and volume expansivity of the fluid, respectively.
  Following the work by Yu et al. [60], the density ratio, Reynolds number, and Prandtl number are set to ρr = 1.00232,
Re = 40.5, and Pr = 0.7, respectively, and the Grashof number is chosen as Gr = 100, 564, 1000, 2000, 2500, and 4500,
respectively, which correspond to five different regimes for the particle motion defined by Gan et al. [61]. The basic simulation
parameters are set to D = 1, δ x = D/20, δt = 0.004, T c = 0, T h = 1, ρ f = 1, and cv, f = 1. The dimensionless relaxation time
for the density distribution function is chosen as τ f = 0.53. Since the heat conductivity and specific heat of the solid do not take
effect in the sedimentation process, the heat conductivity ratio Rλ and the specific heat ratio Rcv are fixed at 1 in the simulations.
  Figure 10 shows the time evolutions of the horizontal position of the particle center in the sedimentation process, where the
horizontal position and time are normalized as x∗ = x/D and t∗ = Uref t/D, respectively. It can be seen from Fig. 10 that the
time evolution of x∗ at the fully developed stage is strongly dependent on the Grashof number Gr. All five regimes [including
                                                                                                                                           17




FIG. 10. Time evolution of the horizontal position of the particle center in the sedimentation process, where the horizontal position and time
are normalized as x∗ = x/D and t∗ = Uref t/D, respectively.


TABLE I. Comparisons of the equilibrium horizontal position for Gr = 1000 and 2000 and the oscillation amplitude of the horizontal position
at the fully developed stage for Gr = 4500 between the present and previous results, where the horizontal position is normalized as x∗ = x/D.

            Gr                                                  1000                          2000                          4500
            Present                                              2.91                          2.74                         1.27
            Yu et al. [60]                                       2.89                          2.74                         1.32
            Kang and Hassan [39]                                 2.91                          2.74                         1.32
            Feng and Michaelides [62]                            2.90                          2.73                         1.35
            Mozafari-Shamsi et al. [63]                          2.76                          2.62                         1.30



the steady settling down along the channel’s centerline (Gr = 100), the periodic oscillating around the channel’s centerline
(Gr = 564), the settling down close to one wall with/without oscillation (Gr = 1000 and 2000), the settling down along the
channel’s centerline without oscillation (Gr = 2500), and the periodic oscillating around the channel’s centerline with a large
amplitude (Gr = 4500)] are successfully reproduced in the present simulations, and the curves shown in Fig. 10 are in good
agreement with previous works (see Fig. 7 in Yu et al. [60] and Fig. 8 in Kang and Hassan [39]). For quantitative comparison,
the equilibrium horizontal position (i.e., the time-averaged x∗ at the fully developed stage) for Gr = 1000 and 2000, as well as
the oscillation amplitude of x∗ at the fully developed stage for Gr = 4500, are calculated and listed in Table I. It can be seen from
Table I that the present results agree well with previous results [39, 60, 62, 63], which demonstrates that the present volumetric
LB method can accurately handle thermal particulate flows when the temperature of the solid particle is assumed to be constant.


                                    D.    Sedimentation of a cold particle with conjugate heat transfer


  To show the versatility of the present volumetric LB method, the sedimentation of a cold particle in a long channel, where
the temperature field inside the solid particle is fully resolved and thus the conjugate heat transfer condition at the solid-fluid
interface is involved, is simulated in this section. The schematic of this problem is also given in Fig. 9, where the mass center
of the circular particle is moved to the channel’s centerline at time t = 0. The four dimensionless parameters, also defined in
Eq. (32), are fixed at ρr = 1.00232, Re = 10.5, Pr = 0.7, and Gr = 1000, respectively. The other simulation parameters are
                                                                                                                                                  18

                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                               1.0

                                                                                                                               0.9

                                                                                                                               0.8

                                                                                                                               0.7

                                                                                                                               0.6

                                                                                                                               0.5

                             (a)                        (b)                       (c)                        (d)


FIG. 11. Temperature field, together with the velocity vectors, in the sedimentation process at the normalized time t∗ = 2.625 for Rλ = 1 and
(a) Rcv = 1, (b) Rcv = 2, (c) Rcv = 4, and (d) Rcv = 8. The dashed and solid circles denoted the initial and current positions of the solid particle,
respectively.




FIG. 12. Time evolution of the normalized vertical velocity of the particle center in the sedimentation process for Rλ = 1 and Rcv = 1, 2, 4,
and 8. The symbol denotes the maximum vertical velocity achieved in the sedimentation process.


chosen the same as those in Sec. III C. Under such configurations, this sedimentation process with conjugate heat transfer is now
characterized by the heat conductivity ratio Rλ = λ s /λ f and the specific heat ratio Rcv = cv,s /cv, f .
  First, the heat conductivity ratio is fixed at Rλ = 1, and the specific heat ratio is set to Rcv = 1, 2, 4, and 8, respectively. Figure
11 shows the temperature field in the sedimentation process at the normalized time t∗ = Uref t/D = 2.625, where the velocity
vectors and the initial and current positions of the particle are also depicted. It can be seen from Fig. 11 that the cold particle is
heated at a smaller rate as the specific heat ratio Rcv increases. To be quantitative, the minimal temperatures inside the particle
at time t∗ = 2.625 are 0.841, 0.656, 0.399, and 0.162 for Rcv = 1, 2, 4, and 8, respectively. Meanwhile, a pair of vortices,
rotating in different directions, are induced in the wake of the particle. At the early stage of the sedimentation process, the fluid
near the particle becomes cold. It thus sinks due to the buoyancy force −ρ f gβ(T − T ref ), which accelerates the sedimentation of
the particle. Therefore, the particle with a relatively large Rcv settles down faster, as observed in Fig. 11. To better understand
the particle sedimentation with conjugate heat transfer, the time evolution of the vertical velocity of the particle center in the
                                                                                           ∗
sedimentation process is plotted in Fig. 12. Here, the vertical velocity is normalized as Uc,y = Uc,y /Uref . It can be seen from Fig.
12 that the time evolution can be sequentially divided into three stages: the accelerating stage, the decelerating stage, and the
                                                                                ∗
equilibrium stage. At the accelerating stage, the normalized vertical velocity Uc,y rapidly increases due to the cooperative effects
                                                                                                                                             19




FIG. 13. Time evolution of the normalized vertical velocity of the particle center in the sedimentation process for Rcv = 8 and Rλ = 100 , 101 ,
102 , and 103 . The symbol denotes the maximum vertical velocity achieved in the sedimentation process.



of the net body force (ρ s − ρ f )g exerted on the particle and the buoyancy force −ρ f gβ(T − T ref ) exerted on its adjacent fluid,
which becomes cold due to the conjugate heat transfer there. As time goes on, the fluid gradually heats the cold particle, and
the temperature of the adjacent fluid increases, decreasing the buoyancy force exerted on the adjacent fluid. Thus, the particle
is slowed down by the drag force from the fluid, which corresponds to the decelerating stage. At the equilibrium stage, the cold
particle is sufficiently heated by the fluid, and the temperature over the entire domain tends to T h , implying that the sedimentation
process with conjugate heat transfer degenerates into an isothermal situation. It is also interesting to note from Fig. 12 that the
                                                                                                                  ∗
duration time of the accelerating stage is almost independent of the specific heat ratio Rcv , while the maximum Uc,y significantly
increases as Rcv increases.
  Then, the influence of the heat conductivity ratio Rλ on the sedimentation process is investigated by fixing Rcv = 8 and varying
                                                                                             ∗
Rλ from 100 to 103 . Figure 13 shows the time evolution of the normalized vertical velocity Uc,y in the sedimentation process. It
can be seen from Fig. 13 that, as Rλ varies from 100 to 103 , the duration time of the accelerating stage monotonously decreases
                                        ∗
from 2.032 to 1.614, while the maximum Uc,y monotonously increases from 0.818 to 0.928. Furthermore, these variation trends
are relatively significant when Rλ is small (such as Rλ ≤ 101 ) and almost visually indistinguishable when Rλ is large enough
(such as Rλ ≥ 102 ). These phenomena observed in Fig. 13 can be explained as follows: As the heat conductivity ratio Rλ
increases, the heat conduction inside the solid particle becomes faster, implying that the conjugate heat transfer between the
particle and fluid is enhanced. Thus, the influence of the buoyancy force −ρ f gβ(T − T ref ), exerted on the adjacent fluid, on the
                                                                                            ∗
particle sedimentation is concentrated in time, which leads to the increase of the maximum Uc,y and the decrease of the duration
time of the accelerating stage. When Rλ is large enough, the conjugate heat transfer is dominated by the heat convection inside
the fluid. Thus, the influence of increasing Rλ on the sedimentation process becomes relatively weak.



                                  E.   Sedimentation of 2048 cold particles with conjugate heat transfer


  As a further application of the present volumetric LB method to dense particulate flows, the sedimentation of 2048 cold
particles in a square cavity is simulated in this section. The temperature fields over the solid and fluid domains are fully resolved,
and the conjugate heat transfer between the particle and fluid is involved. All the four walls of the cavity are adiabatic. The
lattice spacing is fixed at δ x = 0.01. The diameter of the circular particle is chosen as D = 24δ x , and the side length of the square
                                                                                                                                              20




FIG. 14. Snapshots of the sedimentation of 2048 cold particles in a square cavity at the normalized time (a) t∗ = 0.00, (b) t∗ = 21.04, (c)
t∗ = 42.08, (d) t∗ = 63.12, (e) t∗ = 84.16, (f) t∗ = 126.24, (g) t∗ = 210.41, and (h) t∗ = 420.81, where the arrow denotes the velocity vector of
the mass center of the particle.



cavity is set to L = 1700δ x . At time t = 0, the 2048 particles are arranged in 32 rows and 64 columns, and both the horizontal
and vertical gaps between two adjacent particles are fixed at 2δ x . The initial gap between the left wall and the leftmost particle
is set to 19δ x , and the initial gap between the upper wall and the uppermost particle is set to 18δ x . The temperatures of the
particles and fluid are initialized as T c = 0 and T h = 1, respectively. In the simulation, a net body force (ρ s − ρ f )g is applied to
the particle, and the buoyancy force −ρ f gβ(T − T ref ), with the reference temperature T ref = T h , is applied to the fluid. The four
dimensionless parameters, also defined in Eq. (32), are chosen as ρr = 1.5, Re = 40.5, Pr = 0.71, and Gr = 100, respectively.
The heat conductivity and specific heat ratios are fixed at Rλ = 1 and Rcv = 2, respectively. The density, specific heat, and
kinematic viscosity of the fluid are chosen as ρ f = 1, cv, f = 1, and ν = 0.01, respectively. The dimensionless relaxation time for
the density distribution function is set to τ f = 0.55, and the relaxation parameters in R for the temperature field are chosen as
σ0 = σε = σe = 1 and σq = σ j = 1/τg to achieve better numerical stability in the simulation.

  The snapshots of the sedimentation of 2048 cold particles are shown in Fig. 14, where the time is normalized as t∗ = Uref t/D
with the reference velocity Uref = (ρr − 1)|g|πD/2. The snapshots of the temperature and velocity fields at the same moments
                                  p

as Fig. 14 are shown in Fig. 15. It can be seen from Fig. 14(b) that the particles closest to the left and right walls move upwards
instead of settling down at t∗ = 21.04, which is caused by the rising fluid there as the initial gaps between the vertical walls and
particles are relatively large. Such an unexpected phenomenon is also observed in previous works for isothermal sedimentation
[12, 62]. At the same moment as shown in Fig. 15(b), the fluid in the upper part of the cavity (i.e., within the interparticle gaps)
is sufficiently cooled down, while the fluid in the lower part of the cavity remains hot. Due to the initial temperature difference
between the particle and fluid, the conjugate heat transfer between the particle and fluid is very strong at the initial stage of the
sedimentation process, and the temperature field in the upper part of the cavity becomes relatively homogeneous at t∗ = 21.04.
                                                                                                                                            21

                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                           1.0

                                                                                                                                           0.8

                                                                                                                                           0.6

                                                                                                                                           0.4

                                                                                                                                           0.2

                                                                                                                                           0.0
                     (a)                                (b)                               (c)                               (d)
                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                           1.0

                                                                                                                                           0.8

                                                                                                                                           0.6

                                                                                                                                           0.4

                                                                                                                                           0.2

                                                                                                                                           0.0
                     (e)                                (f)                               (g)                               (h)


FIG. 15. Snapshots of the temperature and velocity fields in the sedimentation of 2048 cold particles in a square cavity at the normalized time
(a) t∗ = 0.00, (b) t∗ = 21.04, (c) t∗ = 42.08, (d) t∗ = 63.12, (e) t∗ = 84.16, (f) t∗ = 126.24, (g) t∗ = 210.41, and (h) t∗ = 420.81.



As time goes on, the particles near the left and right walls, as well as the cavity’s centerline, settle down more quickly than
the other particles, which can be observed in Fig. 14(c) and (d) for t∗ = 42.08 and 63.12, respectively. Corresponding to this
sedimentation, the low-temperature region in the upper part of the cavity penetrates into the high-temperature region in the lower
part of the cavity, as shown in Fig. 15(c) and (d). Moreover, two large vortexes are induced near the left and right walls at
t∗ = 42.08, each of which splits into two vortexes, with one close to the bottom of the cavity and the other moving upward, at
t∗ = 63.12. Here, it is worth pointing out that the sedimentation process is fully symmetric concerning the cavity’s centerline
when t∗ ≤ 42.08 and becomes slightly left-right asymmetric at t∗ = 63.12 when the particles start reaching the lower wall of the
cavity. After that, the sedimentation process is fully left-right asymmetric. The snapshots at t∗ = 42.08 and 63.12 indicate that
the particulate Rayleigh-Bénard convection is successfully captured in the present PR DNS. At time t∗ = 84.16, the particles are
distributed almost over the whole cavity [see Fig. 14(e)], and the fluid flow is quite chaotic and relatively intense [see Fig. 15(e)].
Thus, the influence of gravity on particle motion is relatively weak, and the particles are mainly dragged by the fluid. When
t∗ ≥ 126.24, the particles start packing at the bottom of the cavity, and the temperature field tends to be uniform over the entire
cavity. It can be seen from Fig. 14(f), (g), and (h) that the packing process is relatively slow, and the particles at the lower layer
pack more closely. Moreover, this packing process also demonstrates that the present volumetric LB method is quite robust when
the particles are closely packed, which is expected as all the computations in the present method are locally performed except
the linear streaming process of the LB equation. As shown by Fig. 15(h), the temperature field is visually uniform over the
entire cavity at t∗ = 420.81. The corresponding space-average temperature is about 0.5199, close to the analytical equilibrium
temperature T eq = 0.5145 calculated by the energy balance relation. This agreement between the space-average temperature at
t∗ = 420.81 and the analytical equilibrium temperature indicates the validity of the present volumetric LB method for the PR
DNS of thermal particulate flows with conjugate heat transfer.
                                                                                                                                        22

                                                         IV.   CONCLUSIONS


  This work develops a volumetric LB method as a single-domain approach for the particle-resolved direct numerical simulation
of thermal particulate flows with conjugate heat transfer. The fluid flow and heat transfer around every particle are fully resolved,
and the complete information on thermal particulate flows can be provided. The nonslip velocity condition in the solid domain
is strictly satisfied, and the hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid particle are accurately calculated. The differences
in thermophysical properties between the solid and fluid are correctly handled, and the numerical fidelity is well preserved even
very close to the solid-fluid interface. Except for the linear streaming process of the LB equation, all the computations in the
present method are locally performed, ensuring its robustness for closely packed particles and suitability for massively parallel
computing.
  Numerical simulations of transient conjugate heat transfer, isothermal sedimentation of an elliptical particle, and sedimenta-
tion of a cold particle with fixed temperature are first carried out. The present results agree well with the analytical/benchmark
solutions and previous results, which validate the present volumetric LB method in various aspects. Then, the sedimentation of
a cold particle with conjugate heat transfer in a long channel is investigated. It is found that this sedimentation process can be
divided into three stages: the accelerating stage, the decelerating stage, and the equilibrium stage. As the solid-to-fluid specific
heat ratio increases, the maximum sedimentation velocity increases significantly while the accelerating stage lasts almost the
same time. As the solid-to-fluid heat conductivity ratio increases, the maximum sedimentation velocity slightly increases while
the accelerating stage shortens. Finally, the sedimentation of 2048 cold particles with conjugate heat transfer in a square cavity
is simulated. At the early stage, the conjugate heat transfer between the particle and fluid is strong, and the particles near the
left and right walls, as well as the cavity’s centerline, settle down faster, resulting in the pattern of particulate Rayleigh-Bénard
convection. At the end stage, the particles closely pack at the bottom of the cavity, and this packing process is relatively slow
compared with the early sedimentation process.



                                                        ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


  This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China through Grants No. 52376086 and No.
52006244.



                                                    Appendix A: Theoretical analysis


  To determine the parameters in the LB equation for temperature field and the computation of the time derivative ∂ f s ∂t in the
                                                                                                                       

source term, a one-dimensional isothermal system is theoretically analyzed here. As illustrated by Fig. 16, the solid and fluid
are in the left and right semi-infinite domains, respectively, and the thermophysical properties of the solid and fluid are different
(i.e., cv,s , cv, f and λ s , λ f ), implying that ϵ s , ϵ f and R s , R f . The solid-fluid system is initially isothermal and moves right
with a constant velocity (U, 0)T . Based on the Galilean invariance, it is immediately known that the solid-fluid system should
analytically stay at the initial temperature T 0 . To simplify the notations, the position x and time t are denoted by the superscripts
“i” and “n”, respectively, and thus i ± 1 and n ± 1 represent x ± δ x and t ± δt , respectively. For a one-dimensional problem in x
direction, the summation of the internal energy distribution functions g0 , g2 , and g4 can be calculated from the LB equation [i.e.,
                                                                                                                                                      23


                        ( fs = 1, T =T0,  = s , R = Rs )                       U                    ( fs = 0, T =T0,  = l , R = Rl )


                            i0 - 2                       i0 - 1                      i0                   i0 + 1                 i0 + 2
                            solid                        solid                   interface                 fluid                 fluid


FIG. 16. Schematic of the one-dimensional isothermal system moving right with a constant velocity (U, 0)T . The solid and fluid are in the left
and right semi-infinite domains. The circular point denotes the lattice node, the dashed line denotes the lattice grid with the forming dashed
box the lattice cell, and the arrow starting from the lattice node denotes the lattice discrete velocity.


Eq. (17)] as
                                                                                   4 + α1               2 − σi,n
                                                                                                             e 2 − β1
                                                                                                    !
                                   0+2+4 =
                                  gi,n+1              e g0+2+4 + σe
                                                 1 − σi,n                      ϵ −        cv,ref T +                      c ,
                                                                                                                      δt qi,n
                                                          i,n     i,n           i,n               i,n
                                                                                                                                                    (A1a)
                                                                                     6                     2     6
where the subscript “0 + 2 + 4” implies g0 + g2 + g4 . Similarly, the summation of g1 , g5 , and g8 , denoted by g1+5+8 , can be
calculated as
                                                            σi−1,n
                                                                j    − σi−1,n
                                                                        e
                    i,n+1
                   g1+5+8 =       1 − σi−1,n
                                        j    gi−1,n
                                              1+5+8 −                         gi−1,n
                                                                               0+2+4
                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                    (A1b)
                                   σi−1,n − σi−1,n                                                  2 − σi−1,n
                                                                                                                                       
                                     j       e                     σi−1,n
                                                                    e     4 + α1                            j      2 − σi−1,n
                                                                                                                        e     2 − β1  i−1,n
                              +                      ϵ   i−1,n
                                                                 +               cv,ref T      + 
                                                                                          i−1,n                −                       δt q ,
                                         2                           2      6                             4            2        12  c

and the summation of g3 , g6 , and g7 , denoted by g3+6+7 , can be calculated as

                                                            σi+1,n
                                                                j    − σi+1,n
                                                                        e
                    i,n+1
                   g3+6+7 =       1 − σi+1,n
                                        j    gi+1,n
                                              3+6+7 −                         gi+1,n
                                                                               0+2+4
                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                    (A1c)
                                   σi+1,n − σi+1,n                                                  2 − σi+1,n
                                                                                                                                       
                                     j       e                     σi+1,n
                                                                    e     4 + α1                            j      2 − σi+1,n
                                                                                                                        e     2 − β1  i+1,n
                              +                      ϵ   i+1,n
                                                                 +               cv,ref T      + 
                                                                                          i+1,n                −                       δt q .
                                         2                           2      6                             4            2        12  c

  Without loss of generality, the solid-fluid interface is assumed to be located within the lattice cell i0 when the time n is in the
δ-neighborhood of n0 , denoted by U(n0 , δ) = n | n0 − δ < n < n0 + δ . Here, the width of U(n0 , δ) is set to be relatively large to
                                                

ensure that the interface lattice cell remains i0 in the following discussion. As illustrated by Fig. 16, i ≤ i0 −1 and i ≥ i0 +1 are the
solid and fluid lattice cells, respectively. First, the solid lattice cell i ≤ i0 − 1 is considered, where f s = 1, T = T 0 , and ϵ = ϵ s . In
addition, for the solid lattice cell, the relaxation matrix is denoted by R s , and the source term qc = −cv u · ∇T + (cv,s − cv, f )T ∂ f s ∂t
                                                                                                                                            

vanishes because there are ∇T = 0 and ∂ f s ∂t = 0. With these conditions, and for i ≤ i0 − 1, Eq. (A1a) can be reformulated as
                                                

                                              4 + α1                                          4 + α1
                                                                !            "                                 !#
                              g0+2+4 − ϵ s −
                               i,n+1
                                                      cv,ref T 0 = 1 − σe,s g0+2+4 − ϵ s −           cv,ref T 0 .
                                                                             i,n
                                                                                                                                        (A2)
                                                  6                                             6
Recursively substituting Eq. (A2) into itself by varying the time n, and considering |1 − σe | < 1, Eq. (A2) immediately leads to
                                                                           4 + α1
                                                      0+2+4 = ϵ s −
                                                     gi,n
                                                                             6
                                                                                  cv,ref T 0 ,     ∀ i ≤ i0 − 1.                                     (A3)

Therefore, the summation g0+2+4 remains constant for the solid lattice cell. For i ≤ i0 , Eq. (A1b) can be reformulated as
                                        4 + α1                                  4 + α1
                                                                     i−1,n                       !
                                 i,n+1
                               g1+5+8 −        cv,ref T 0 = 1 − σ j,s g1+5+8 −           cv,ref T 0 .                                                (A4)
                                          12                                       12
Recursively substituting Eq. (A4) into itself by varying the time n, and considering |1 − σ j | < 1, Eq. (A4) immediately leads to
                                                                          4 + α1
                                                               1+5+8 =
                                                              gi,n
                                                                            12
                                                                                 cv,ref T 0 ,      ∀ i ≤ i0 .                                        (A5)
                                                                                                                                                             24

Therefore, the summation g1+5+8 remains constant for the solid and interface lattice cells. To ensure the analytical state of the
solid (i.e., ϵ = ϵ s and thus T = T 0 for i ≤ i0 − 1), the summation g3+6+7 is expected to be 4+α1
                                                                                               12 cv,ref T 0 for the solid lattice cell
given Eqs. (A3) and (A5). For i ≤ i0 − 2, Eq. (A1c) can be reformulated as
                                          4 + α1                                 4 + α1
                                                                       i+1,n                    !
                                  i,n+1
                                g3+6+7 −         cv,ref T 0 = 1 − σ j,s g3+6+7 −        cv,ref T 0 ,                                                        (A6)
                                            12                                     12
which suggests that the quantity g3+6+7 − 4+α1
                                           12 cv,ref T 0 , if it is nonzero, will damply transfer into the solid starting from the
rightmost solid lattice cell i0 − 1. Therefore, the rightmost solid lattice cell i0 − 1, closest to the solid-fluid interface, is the critical
factor in ensuring the analytical state of the solid. For i = i0 − 1, the summation g3+6+7 can be calculated from Eq. (A1c) as
follows:
                                                               i0 ,n   i0 ,n
                 4 + α1              2 − σie0 ,n 4 + β1 i0 ,n σ j + σe − 2                                     4 + α1
                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                              0 ,n
                                                                                                                                  1
      g3+6+7 =
       i0 −1,n+1
                        cv,ref T 0 +                   δt qc +                             gi0+2+4 − ϵ i0 ,n +        cv,ref T 0 + δt qic0 ,n          ,    (A7)
                   12                   4          6                 2                                           6                2
where the last two terms are expected to be zero. For this purpose, we can set

                                                                      β1 = −4,                                                                             (A8a)
                                                                                      4 + α1             1
                                   σij0 ,n + σie0 ,n = 2   or      0 ,n
                                                                gi0+2+4 = ϵ i0 ,n −          cv,ref T 0 − δt qic0 ,n .                                     (A8b)
                                                                                        6                2
  Then, the fluid lattice cell i ≥ i0 + 1 is considered, where f s = 0, T = T 0 , and ϵ = ϵ f . In addition, the relaxation matrix is
denoted by R f , and similar to the solid lattice cell, the source term qc = −cv u · ∇T + (cv,s − cv, f )T ∂ f s ∂t also vanishes here. With
                                                                                                                

these conditions, and for i ≥ i0 + 1, Eq. (A1a) can be reformulated as
                                            4 + α1                                           4 + α1
                                                            !              " i,n                          !#
                           gi,n+1
                            0+2+4 −   ϵ f −        c     T
                                                    v,ref 0  =  1 − σ e, f    g0+2+4 − ϵ f −        cv,ref 0 .
                                                                                                          T                                                 (A9)
                                              6                                                6
Recursively substituting Eq. (A9) into itself by varying the time n, and considering |1 − σe | < 1, Eq. (A9) immediately leads to
                                                                4 + α1
                                               0+2+4 = ϵ f −
                                              gi,n
                                                                  6
                                                                       cv,ref T 0 ,        ∀ i ≥ i0 + 1.                                                   (A10)

Therefore, the summation g0+2+4 remains constant for the fluid lattice cell. For i ≥ i0 , Eq. (A1c) can be reformulated as
                                        4 + α1                                   4 + α1
                                                                      i+1,n                       !
                                 i,n+1
                               g3+6+7 −        cv,ref T 0 = 1 − σ j, f g3+6+7 −           cv,ref T 0 .                                                     (A11)
                                          12                                       12
Recursively substituting Eq. (A11) into itself by varying the time n, and considering |1 − σ j | < 1, Eq. (A11) immediately leads
to
                                                                4 + α1
                                                     3+6+7 =
                                                    gi,n
                                                                  12
                                                                       cv,ref T 0 ,       ∀ i ≥ i0 .                                                       (A12)

Therefore, the summation g3+6+7 remains constant for the fluid and interface lattice cells. To ensure the analytical state of the
fluid (i.e., ϵ = ϵ f and thus T = T 0 for i ≥ i0 + 1), the summation g1+5+8 is expected to be 4+α1
                                                                                               12 cv,ref T 0 for the fluid lattice cell
given Eqs. (A10) and (A12). For i ≥ i0 + 2, Eq. (A1b) can be reformulated as
                                          4 + α1                                  4 + α1
                                                                        i−1,n                    !
                                 i,n+1
                               g1+5+8 −          cv,ref T 0 = 1 − σ j, f g1+5+8 −        cv,ref T 0 ,                                                      (A13)
                                            12                                      12
which suggests that the quantity g1+5+8 − 4+α 1
                                           12 cv,ref T 0 , if it is nonzero, will damply transfer into the fluid starting from the leftmost
fluid lattice cell i0 + 1. Therefore, the leftmost fluid lattice cell i0 + 1, closest to the solid-fluid interface, is the critical factor in
ensuring the analytical state of the fluid. For i = i0 + 1, the summation g1+5+8 can be calculated from Eq. (A1b) as follows:
                                                               i0 ,n   i0 ,n
                4 + α1              2 − σie0 ,n 4 + β1 i0 ,n σ j + σe − 2                                     4 + α1
                                                                                                                                               !
      i0 +1,n+1                                                                              0 ,n
                                                                                                                                 1
     g1+5+8 =          cv,ref T 0 +                   δt q c +                            gi0+2+4 − ϵ i0 ,n +        cv,ref T 0 + δt qic0 ,n       ,       (A14)
                  12                   4          6                  2                                          6                2
                                                                                                                                                                    25

where the last two terms are expected to be zero. For this purpose, we can set

                                                                                 β1 = −4,                                                                        (A15a)
                                                                                                   4 + α1             1
                                        σij0 ,n + σie0 ,n = 2     or          0 ,n
                                                                           gi0+2+4 = ϵ i0 ,n −            cv,ref T 0 − δt qic0 ,n .                              (A15b)
                                                                                                     6                2
Here, it is worth pointing out that Eq. (A15) is identical to Eq. (A8), which means that the analytical states of the solid and fluid
are achieved, or not, at the same time.
  At last, the interface lattice cell i = i0 is considered, where T = T 0 but f s and ϵ vary with time. In addition, the relaxation
matrix also varies with time and is denoted by Ri0 ,n , and the source term qc = −cv u · ∇T + (cv,s − cv, f )T ∂ f s ∂t is nonzero and can
                                                                                                                           

be simplified as qic0 ,n = (cv,s − cv, f )T 0 ∂ f s ∂t i0 ,n because ∇T = 0, cv,s , cv, f , and ∂ f s ∂t , 0. It can be known from Eqs. (A5) and
                                                                                                   

(A12) that, for the interface lattice cell, there are

                                                               0 ,n      0 ,n
                                                                                             4 + α1
                                                            gi1+5+8 = gi3+6+7 =                     cv,ref T 0 .                                                  (A16)
                                                                                               12
                                                    δt                            i0 ,n                          0 ,n
Considering the definition ϵ =             i=0 gi + 2 qc and to ensure T                = T 0 , the summation gi0+2+4 is expected to be ϵ i0 ,n − 4+α
                                      P8
                                                                                                                                                    6 cv,ref T 0 −
                                                                                                                                                     1


      i0 ,n
2 δt qc with ϵ
1              i0 ,n
                     = civ0 ,n T 0 = [cv, f + (cv,s − cv, f ) f si0 ,n ]T 0 . For i = i0 , Eq. (A1a) can be reformulated as

                                 4 + α1                                                                        4 + α1
                                                                                                                                              !
            0 ,n+1
                                                    1                                    i ,n                                      1 i0 ,n
                   − ϵ i0 ,n+1 +        cv,ref T 0 + δt qic0 ,n+1 =               i0 ,n                 i0 ,n
                                                                           
         gi0+2+4                                                            1 − σe          g0+2+4 − ϵ +
                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                      cv,ref T 0 + δt qc
                                   6                2                                                            6                  2
                                                                                      i0 ,n                                                                       (A17)
                                                                              2 − σe 4 + β1 i0 ,n  i0 ,n+1                        qi0 ,n+1 + qic0 ,n 
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                           −                       δt qc − ϵ        − ϵ i0 ,n − δt c                     ,
                                                                                 2              6                                            2

where the last two terms on the right-hand side are expected to be zero. For this purpose, we can set

                                                                                 β1 = −4,                                                                        (A18a)
                                                                                        qi0 ,n+1 + qic0 ,n
                                                                ϵ i0 ,n+1 − ϵ i0 ,n = δt c                 .                                                     (A18b)
                                                                                                2
Substituting ϵ i0 ,n = [cv, f + (cv,s − cv, f ) f si0 ,n ]T 0 and qic0 ,n = (cv,s − cv, f )T 0 ∂ f s ∂t i0 ,n into Eq. (A18b), we finally have
                                                                                                     

                                                                !i0 ,n+1            !i0 ,n
                                                         ∂ fs                ∂ fs              f i0 ,n+1 − f si0 ,n
                                                                           +                 =2 s                   ,                                             (A19)
                                                         ∂t                  ∂t                         δt
                                                                                                                    0 ,n
which acts as a constraint in computing the time derivative ∂ f s ∂t in real simulations. Note that the expected gi0+2+4 = ϵ i0 ,n −
                                                                 
                       i0 ,n
  6 cv,ref T 0 − 2 δt qc
4+α1             1
                              for the interface lattice cell is precisely the second relation in Eqs. (A8b) and (A15b), implying that the
                 i0 ,n       i0 ,n
first relation σ j + σe = 2 is not required. Based on the above analysis, it can be concluded that only β1 = −4 and Eq. (A19)
are necessary to ensure the analytical state of the solid-fluid system. Otherwise, temperature deviation will be induced at the
interface lattice cell, which damply transfers into the solid and fluid as described by Eqs. (A6) and (A13), respectively.




 [1] S. Balachandar and J. K. Eaton, Turbulent dispersed multiphase flow, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 42, 111 (2010).
 [2] M. Maxey, Simulation methods for particulate flows and concentrated suspensions, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 49, 171 (2017).
 [3] R. I. Singh, A. Brink, and M. Hupa, CFD modeling to study fluidized bed combustion and gasification, Appl. Therm. Eng. 52, 585 (2013).
 [4] D. Di Carlo, Inertial microfluidics, Lab Chip 9, 3038 (2009).
 [5] S. V. Apte, M. Martin, and N. A. Patankar, A numerical method for fully resolved simulation (FRS) of rigid particle-flow interactions in
     complex flows, J. Comput. Phys. 228, 2712 (2009).
                                                                                                                                           26

 [6] Z. Shen, G. Wang, D. Huang, and F. Jin, A resolved CFD-DEM coupling model for modeling two-phase fluids interaction with irregularly
     shaped particles, J. Comput. Phys. 448, 110695 (2022).
 [7] M. G. Pai and S. Subramaniam, A comprehensive probability density function formalism for multiphase flows, J. Fluid Mech. 628, 181
     (2009).
 [8] J. Capecelatro and O. Desjardins, An Euler-Lagrange strategy for simulating particle-laden flows, J. Comput. Phys. 238, 1 (2013).
 [9] S. Tenneti and S. Subramaniam, Particle-resolved direct numerical simulation for gas-solid flow model development, Annu. Rev. Fluid
     Mech. 46, 199 (2014).
[10] T. M. Burton and J. K. Eaton, Fully resolved simulations of particle-turbulence interaction, J. Fluid Mech. 545, 67 (2005).
[11] M. Uhlmann, An immersed boundary method with direct forcing for the simulation of particulate flows, J. Comput. Phys. 209, 448
     (2005).
[12] D. Nie and J. Lin, A LB-DF/FD method for particle suspensions, Commun. Comput. Phys. 7, 544 (2010).
[13] Y. Chen, Q. Cai, Z. Xia, M. Wang, and S. Chen, Momentum-exchange method in lattice Boltzmann simulations of particle-fluid interac-
     tions, Phys. Rev. E 88, 013303 (2013).
[14] I. Cheylan, J. Favier, and P. Sagaut, Immersed boundary conditions for moving objects in turbulent flows with the lattice-Boltzmann
     method, Phys. Fluids 33, 095101 (2021).
[15] F. J. Higuera, S. Succi, and R. Benzi, Lattice gas dynamics with enhanced collisions, Europhys. Lett. 9, 345 (1989).
[16] R. Benzi, S. Succi, and M. Vergassola, The lattice Boltzmann equation: theory and applications, Phys. Rep. 222, 145 (1992).
[17] C. K. Aidun and J. R. Clausen, Lattice-Boltzmann method for complex flows, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 42, 439 (2010).
[18] S. Succi, Lattice Boltzmann 2038, Europhys. Lett. 109, 50001 (2015).
[19] A. J. C. Ladd, Numerical simulations of particulate suspensions via a discretized Boltzmann equation. Part 1. Theoretical foundation, J.
     Fluid Mech. 271, 285 (1994).
[20] A. J. C. Ladd, Numerical simulations of particulate suspensions via a discretized Boltzmann equation. Part 2. Numerical results, J. Fluid
     Mech. 271, 311 (1994).
[21] D. R. Noble and J. R. Torczynski, A lattice-Boltzmann method for partially saturated computational cells, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 9, 1189
     (1998).
[22] Z.-G. Feng and E. E. Michaelides, The immersed boundary-lattice Boltzmann method for solving fluid–particles interaction problems, J.
     Comput. Phys. 195, 602 (2004).
[23] R. Mei, L.-S. Luo, and W. Shyy, An accurate curved boundary treatment in the lattice Boltzmann method, J. Comput. Phys. 155, 307
     (1999).
[24] M. Bouzidi, M. Firdaouss, and P. Lallemand, Momentum transfer of a Boltzmann-lattice fluid with boundaries, Phys. Fluids 13, 3452
     (2001).
[25] O. Filippova and D. Hänel, Grid refinement for lattice-BGK models, J. Comput. Phys. 147, 219 (1998).
[26] P. Lallemand and L.-S. Luo, Lattice Boltzmann method for moving boundaries, J. Comput. Phys. 184, 406 (2003).
[27] H. Li, X. Lu, H. Fang, and Y. Qian, Force evaluations in lattice Boltzmann simulations with moving boundaries in two dimensions, Phys.
     Rev. E 70, 026701 (2004).
[28] C. S. Peskin, Numerical analysis of blood flow in the heart, J. Comput. Phys. 25, 220 (1977).
[29] Z.-G. Feng and E. E. Michaelides, Proteus: a direct forcing method in the simulations of particulate flows, J. Comput. Phys. 202, 20
     (2005).
[30] S. K. Kang and Y. A. Hassan, A comparative study of direct-forcing immersed boundary-lattice Boltzmann methods for stationary
     complex boundaries, Int. J. Numer. Meth. Fl. 66, 1132 (2011).
[31] Y. Kim and C. S. Peskin, Penalty immersed boundary method for an elastic boundary with mass, Phys. Fluids 19, 053103 (2007).
[32] Z. Chen and M. Wang, An improved immersed moving boundary for hydrodynamic force calculation in lattice Boltzmann method, Int.
     J. Numer. Meth. Eng. 121, 4493 (2020).
                                                                                                                                            27

[33] B. K. Cook, D. R. Noble, and J. R. Williams, A direct simulation method for particle-fluid systems, Eng. Comput. 21, 151 (2004).
[34] Y. T. Feng, K. Han, and D. R. J. Owen, Combined three-dimensional lattice Boltzmann method and discrete element method for modelling
     fluid-particle interactions with experimental assessment, Int. J. Numer. Meth. Eng. 81, 229 (2010).
[35] X. Cui, J. Li, A. Chan, and D. Chapman, Coupled DEM–LBM simulation of internal fluidisation induced by a leaking pipe, Powder
     Technol. 254, 299 (2014).
[36] Y. Han and P. Cundall, Verification of two-dimensional LBM-DEM coupling approach and its application in modeling episodic sand
     production in borehole, Petroleum 3, 179 (2017).
[37] S. A. Galindo-Torres, S. Palma, S. Quintero, A. Scheuermann, X. Zhang, K. Krabbenhoft, M. Ruest, and D. Finn, An airblast hazard
     simulation engine for block caving sites, Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. 107, 31 (2018).
[38] J. Hu, M. Xu, J. Zhang, and Y. Wang, A consistent treatment of moving boundaries with thermal convection for lattice Boltzmann method,
     Phys. Fluids 33, 123312 (2021).
[39] S. K. Kang and Y. A. Hassan, A direct-forcing immersed boundary method for the thermal lattice Boltzmann method, Comput. Fluids
     49, 36 (2011).
[40] R. Huang and H. Wu, An immersed boundary-thermal lattice Boltzmann method for solid-liquid phase change, J. Comput. Phys. 277,
     305 (2014).
[41] H. Zhang, A. Yu, W. Zhong, and Y. Tan, A combined TLBM-IBM-DEM scheme for simulating isothermal particulate flow in fluid, Int.
     J. Heat Mass Tran. 91, 178 (2015).
[42] J. Wu, Y. Cheng, and L. A. Miller, An iterative source correction based immersed boundary-lattice Boltzmann method for thermal flow
     simulations, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 115, 450 (2017).
[43] S. Tao, Q. He, B. Chen, and F. G. F. Qin, Distribution function correction-based immersed boundary lattice Boltzmann method for thermal
     particle flows, Comput. Part. Mech. 8, 459 (2021).
[44] X. He, S. Chen, and G. D. Doolen, A novel thermal model for the lattice Boltzmann method in incompressible limit, J. Comput. Phys.
     146, 282 (1998).
[45] R. Huang and H. Wu, Total enthalpy-based lattice Boltzmann method with adaptive mesh refinement for solid-liquid phase change, J.
     Comput. Phys. 315, 65 (2016).
[46] R. Huang, H. Wu, and N. A. Adams, Lattice Boltzmann model with adjustable equation of state for coupled thermo-hydrodynamic flows,
     J. Comput. Phys. 392, 227 (2019).
[47] X. Chen and P. Han, A note on the solution of conjugate heat transfer problems using SIMPLE-like algorithms, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow
     21, 463 (2000).
[48] H. Chen, O. Filippova, J. Hoch, K. Molvig, R. Shock, C. Teixeira, and R. Zhang, Grid refinement in lattice Boltzmann methods based on
     volumetric formulation, Physica A 362, 158 (2006).
[49] Y.-H. Qian, D. d’Humières, and P. Lallemand, Lattice BGK models for Navier-Stokes equation, Europhys. Lett. 17, 479 (1992).
[50] R. Huang and H. Wu, Phase interface effects in the total enthalpy-based lattice Boltzmann model for solid-liquid phase change, J. Comput.
     Phys. 294, 346 (2015).
[51] P. Lallemand and L.-S. Luo, Theory of the lattice Boltzmann method: Dispersion, dissipation, isotropy, Galilean invariance, and stability,
     Phys. Rev. E 61, 6546 (2000).
[52] Z. Guo, C. Zheng, and B. Shi, Discrete lattice effects on the forcing term in the lattice Boltzmann method, Phys. Rev. E 65, 046308
     (2002).
[53] Z. Guo and C. Zheng, Analysis of lattice Boltzmann equation for microscale gas flows: relaxation times, boundary conditions and the
     Knudsen layer, Int. J. Comput. Fluid D 22, 465 (2008).
[54] R. Huang and H. Wu, Lattice Boltzmann model for the correct convection-diffusion equation with divergence-free velocity field, Phys.
     Rev. E 91, 033302 (2015).
[55] H. Huang, X. Yang, M. Krafczyk, and X.-Y. Lu, Rotation of spheroidal particles in Couette flows, J. Fluid Mech. 692, 369–394 (2012).
                                                                                                                                              28

[56] R. Glowinski, T. W. Pan, T. I. Hesla, D. D. Joseph, and J. Périaux, A fictitious domain approach to the direct numerical simulation of
     incompressible viscous flow past moving rigid bodies: application to particulate flow, J. Comput. Phys. 169, 363 (2001).
[57] T.-W. Pan, D. D. Joseph, and R. Glowinski, Simulating the dynamics of fluid-ellipsoid interactions, Comput. Struct. 83, 463 (2005).
[58] K. Suzuki and T. Inamuro, Effect of internal mass in the simulation of a moving body by the immersed boundary method, Comput. Fluids
     49, 173 (2011).
[59] Z. Xia, K. W. Connington, S. Rapaka, P. Yue, J. J. Feng, and S. Chen, Flow patterns in the sedimentation of an elliptical particle, J. Fluid
     Mech. 625, 249–272 (2009).
[60] Z. Yu, X. Shao, and A. Wachs, A fictitious domain method for particulate flows with heat transfer, J. Comput. Phys. 217, 424 (2006).
[61] H. Gan, J. Chang, J. J. Feng, and H. H. Hu, Direct numerical simulation of the sedimentation of solid particles with thermal convection,
     J. Fluid Mech. 481, 385–411 (2003).
[62] Z.-G. Feng and E. E. Michaelides, Heat transfer in particulate flows with direct numerical simulation (DNS), Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 52,
     777 (2009).
[63] M. Mozafari-Shamsi, M. Sefid, and G. Imani, Application of the ghost fluid lattice Boltzmann method to moving curved boundaries with
     constant temperature or heat flux conditions, Comput. Fluids 167, 51 (2018).
